https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/28/world/middleeast/isis-kurds-baghdadi.html
As Kurds Tracked ISIS Leader, U.S. Withdrawal Threw Raid Into Turmoil - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
42
AdvertisementSupported byTrump’s decision to pull troops from Syria upended a 5-year alliance and threw the plans against al-Baghdadi into disarray.By Ben Hubbard and Eric SchmittQAMISHLI, Syria — When the international manhunt for Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State, zoomed in  on a village in northwestern Syria, the United States turned to its local allies to help track the world’s most-wanted terrorist.The American allies, a Kurdish-led force that had partnered with the United States to fight ISIS, sent spies to watch his isolated villa. To confirm it was him, they stole a pair of Mr. al-Baghdadi’s underwear — long, white boxers — and obtained a blood sample, both for DNA testing, the force’s commander, Mazlum Abdi, said in a phone interview on Monday.American officials would not discuss the specific intelligence provided by the Kurds, but said that their role in finding Mr. al-Baghdadi was essential — more so than all other countries combined, as one put it — contradicting President Trump’s assertion over the weekend that the United States “got very little help.”Yet even as the Syrian Kurdish fighters were risking their lives in the hunt that led to Mr. al-Baghdadi’s death this weekend, Mr. Trump abruptly shattered America’s five-year partnership with them. He decided to withdraw American troops from northern Syria, leaving the Kurds suddenly vulnerable to an invasion by Turkey and feeling stung by an American betrayal, and throwing the Baghdadi operation into turmoil as the Kurds suspended their security cooperation with the United States to rush off and defend their land.“We thought that America would keep its promises,” said Mr. Abdi, the commander of the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces. “But in the end there was weakness — and disappointment.”The United States joined forces with Mr. Abdi’s group five years ago, when it was looking for skilled Syrian fighters who could effectively serve as ground troops for an American air campaign against the Islamic State. As the alliance matured, the United States armed and trained Kurdish-led fighters and pressed them to shift their priorities to serve American interests.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: The life and death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. My colleague Natalie Kitroeff talks to Rukmini Callimachi about the man who created ISIS.It’s Tuesday, October 29.Rukmini, who was Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi?Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was the caliph of the Islamic State. He was the leader of this terrorist group that, at its height, controlled territory the size of Great Britain in Iraq and Syria, that drew in tens of thousands of recruits from 100 countries — 40,000, we believe — and that succeeded in carrying out attacks not just in Iraq and Syria, not just in Paris and Brussels, but in a total of — at the last count, I had 40 different countries around the world.So how does one become that? How do you become the leader of a caliphate?What my reporting has shown is that it’s actually not what people say it was. People think that he was radicalized at Camp Bucca in the year 2004, which is right after the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, when Baghdadi is picked up in a raid that was, in fact, aiming to get his brother-in-law. He is taken to an American facility, Camp Bucca. And in Camp Bucca, the theory goes, he rubbed shoulders with the future leaders of the insurgency, and it was there that he became radicalized through those people and through his hatred of the American occupiers. This has been out in biographies of Baghdadi, said by the top analysts who are in this field, but in fact, when you go and speak to the people who were incarcerated with him, you realize that he showed up already radicalized. So in order to understand who he is, you have to back up, and you have to go to, I would say, his childhood and his teenage years.And what was his childhood like?He came from a modest family from a village called Al Jallam, in central Iraq. This is a village located in what is known as the Sunni heartland of the country. And crucially, he came from a family that was from something called the Badri tribe in Al Jallam. And the Badri tribe traces its ancestry to the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad. Beyond all that, his family chose this one particular mosque that, according to people that I spoke to in that neighborhood, was not just any mosque. It was a Wahhabi mosque. The Wahhabi strain of Islam is one of the most hard-line, the most austere, the most conservative. And early on in his upbringing, you see two things. You see, one, a real propensity towards religion, towards faith. His childhood friends, his classmates all talk about how they would be off on picnics. They’d be doing wheelies with their bikes in the street, and he was at the mosque.Wow.And the second thing that you hear about him around adolescence is that he starts to be outspoken when he sees people around him who are in some way violating what he believes to be Islamic law. He gets into a big fight with his next-door neighbor when his next-door neighbor gets a tattoo. Baghdadi was irate about that, and he saw that as a violation of Shariah law, and he let his neighbor know. He got bolder and bolder as he became older. So in his later teenage years, he started to even upbraid and reprimand people, like the owner of the mosque that he attended. This is somebody who was older than him and who was a mentor to him.Wow.But he went so far as to chastise that man when he began smoking, telling him, quote, “When you stand up and recite the prayer, the smell of your breath will make the angels fly away.”It sounds like Baghdadi is getting more and more dogmatic. Is that right?That certainly seems to be what people around him are noticing, but it’s not yet at the point where it’s really raising red flags. So he graduates high school. We were able to actually get his high school transcript, and from that, we gleaned that he was not a great student. But even though he has his low grades, he manages to get into the University of Baghdad, specifically in their Islamic studies department and their Shariah law department, and he begins a religious education. He doesn’t have a lot of money, and so he’s supporting himself by teaching Quranic classes and, later, by becoming a preacher and an imam at a local mosque. And it’s at this local mosque that another trait of Baghdadi comes to light. People always described him as shy, as reserved, as taciturn, but by this point, he’s now in his early 20s, and these qualities that perhaps were seen as weaknesses when he was a child, they’re now being interpreted as a sign of discipline, a sign of somebody who doesn’t have a loose tongue, who says only exactly what he has to say and nothing more. It’s around this time as well that he creates a soccer team that he becomes the coach of.Wait, he’s a soccer coach?He’s a soccer coach, and he was actually a pretty good player, based on what other people said, and I get that there’s some dissonance there. Jihadist groups have, in the past, declared soccer to be something that was haram, forbidden, but there it was. He was a good soccer player. He enjoyed playing soccer. But here’s the twist. I spoke to members of his soccer team, and what’s interesting is they said that they would play soccer. And at the end of the practice, he would call them all together, and at that point, he would start handing out leaflets that were trying to propagate the tenets of Wahhabi Islam. And one young man that I spoke to — he was a teenager back when this occurred — he brought this pamphlet home to his family. And his parents flew into a rage and pulled him from the soccer team, because they saw this as something inappropriate and as something that could be dangerous for their son. So he was out of step, I think, with the culture around him.And it also sounds like he was, even then, willing to take risks to be spreading these very hardline beliefs.Right. More and more as he’s becoming an adult, you’re seeing a man who isn’t able to sit on the sidelines and just live his own faith in a private manner. He needs to co-opt people and turn them over to his interpretation of Islam, and he feels a need to police the faith of others, a need to tell others how to be good Muslims, and a need to call out what he perceived as transgressions against that faith.O.K., so what happens next?In 2003, America begins an invasion of Iraq with its coalition partners. People were dispersing. Nobody wanted to be in Baghdad at this point in time, because they were expecting that there were going to be strikes and bombardments. He goes back to Samarra, allegedly. And less than a year later, in early 2004, he’s picked up in Falluja at the home of his brother-in-law, who at that point had picked up guns against the American occupation. The way it’s been described to me is that he was essentially picked up almost by mistake. He was a hanger-on to his brother-in-law, who had become radicalized. So the first thing that happens, according to his fellow prisoners, is that he was named the emir of their tent. At Camp Bucca, there were specific tents that had dozens of prisoners each, and he gets named the emir of his tent. And under his emirship, he very quickly starts to incite violence against Shia prisoners that are being held inside this compound, to the point that Shia prisoners who were incarcerated there began to clamor at the gates, asking the Americans to be moved. Once the Shias were mostly removed from his tent, he then turned his attention to his fellow Sunnis, and he began actively policing the way that they practiced their faith. Why is your beard so short? How many times did you pray today? Why didn’t you fast? It’s the middle of Ramadan, and so on. One anecdote that I was told is they caught somebody smoking in their tent, and Baghdadi gave the order that he needed to be held down, and two of his fingers were cut off with a shank that had been made from the metal inside the air-conditioning unit that they had in their tent.Wow.Yeah. And interestingly, that punishment, cutting off the two fingers that held the cigarette butt, that is a punishment that I later heard about in Mosul from people who were accused of smoking under ISIS.So that seems pretty extreme. How rare is this kind of behavior in the camp?I think it’s very extreme, and I think that it points to an evolution that happened before he got to Camp Bucca, because that’s a pretty out-there place to be, to be doing that kind of thing in 2004 in Camp Bucca.How does he get out of this camp?The Americans let him out end of 2004, less than a year after they captured him. Unfortunately, at that point in time, the American-led coalition had far bigger problems.This has been tough weeks in that country. Coalition forces have encountered serious violence in some areas of Iraq. Our military commanders report that this violence is being instigated by three groups.There was an insurgency that was exploding all over Iraq.Some remnants of Saddam Hussein’s regime, along with Islamic militants, have attacked coalition forces in the city of Falluja. Terrorists from other countries have infiltrated Iraq to incite and organize attacks.Suicide bombs were going off. Hundreds of people were getting killed, and they were busy trying to contain the chaos that had been unleashed in this country.And he’s not even on their radar screen.He’s not on their radar screen and, in fact, he very much disappears from view. This is kind of the black hole in Baghdadi’s evolution, where we know the least about this period. But what is clear about this period, when we look back and we start interviewing people who were members of the insurgency, we realize that, in fact, he was working his way up the ranks of the organization all along. I have spoken to members of the Islamic State of Iraq. This is the group that preceded the Islamic State. And already, in 2006, 2007, 2008, you are seeing him in the presence of senior leaders of the group that goes on to be the Islamic State, but he’s there in a support role. He’s an aide. He’s an associate. He’s not the big guy yet. And the first time that he reappears for coalition officials is in 2009, when they do a raid in the house of one of the leaders of the insurgency, and they find a personnel roster that includes the following name, Abu Dua. Abu Dua, we later learn, is the nom de guerre that Baghdadi wore before he took the name Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. And really just a year later, in 2010, the penultimate leader of ISIS is killed, and Baghdadi is named the new leader. He’s taking over, really, what was a flagging and nearly defeated insurgency. According to the C.I.A., they were down to just 700 or so members.We want to flag for you tonight what may be an emerging genocide.It goes on to rebuild itself under his leadership.The Islamic army known as ISIS has seized vast territory in Syria and Iraq.So that by 2014 —The leader of the militant group ISIS has called on Muslims throughout the world to travel to Iraq and Syria to help build an Islamic state.Training camps are open. So is our battlefield, a voice purporting to be that of the leader of ISIS says in this video. Come on, youths of Islam. Let’s take Baghdad together.And it’s working. Thousands of young men from across the Muslim world have offered their allegiance to a leader whose face they will probably never see.He and his group have seized an area the size of Great Britain in Iraq and Syria that is now controlling the fates of up to 12 million people.From YouTube, Twitter and Facebook to professional infographics and even their own mobile app, the group Islamic State is executing a highly strategic social media campaign to spread its cause. Experts say this level of sophistication is unprecedented.That has brought in some 40,000 foreign fighters from a hundred different countries.[SPEAKING ARABIC]And the moment in July of 2014 when he addresses the citizens of his so-called caliphate —[SPEAKING ARABIC]— that marks the first time that he has allowed his face to be videotaped uncovered and open for all to see.[SPEAKING ARABIC]And we don’t see him again publicly in a televised address again until this year, 2019, basically just months before his death.We’ll be right back.Rukmini, what had Baghdadi been doing for the last five years?So for the last five years, he is never seen publicly in an address to the public, but what we know is that the Islamic State is running. And what is the Islamic State? The Islamic State was, on the one hand, a sprawling administration that provided garbage collection and issued birth certificates and ran its own D.M.V. and ran very much like a state. But the other thing that they were doing is they tapped the tens of thousands of people that they recruited from overseas from a hundred different countries, and they began using those people as, essentially, connectors to those countries in order to start carrying out attacks abroad.ISIS took responsibility for last night’s attack, calling the knife men a soldier of the caliphate.And very quickly we learn that ISIS has created a ritual.They released a two-and-a-half-minute video, which they say shows the attacker, whose face is covered, pledging allegiance to the group’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.And the ritual is that both people who are carrying out acts of violence directed by ISIS and those who are merely inspired by the group record a video —[SPEAKING ARABIC]— pledging allegiance not to ISIS, but to Baghdadi specifically. You see this in the Berlin attacker who used a large truck to run over people.[SPEAKING ARABIC]You see this in the testament of the Paris attackers, who left behind a video pledging allegiance to him.[SPEAKING FRENCH]Emergency 911. This is [INAUDIBLE]. You are being recorded.You see it in the 911 call that Omar Mateen made from the Pulse night club.What’s your name?My name is I pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi of the Islamic State.So you see the start of a cult of personality beginning where he is, in a way, invisible. You don’t see him in public anymore. And yet his name is everywhere, on the tips of the tongues of every single one of these attackers.What’s your name?I pledge my allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, [SPEAKING ARABIC] on behalf of the Islamic State.So essentially, to his followers, he is ISIS.That’s right. That’s right.And so as Baghdadi becomes more infamous, more of a known name, how are U.S. intelligence officials responding?He becomes the most hunted man in the world.Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is the world’s most wanted man.The fate of a key ISIS leader is unclear this morning after U.S. airstrikes in Iraq.U.S. command have been unable to confirm media speculation Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was one of 50 casualties killed in an airstrike near Mosul in northern Iraq.The U.S. is investigating reports from Russia that one of its airstrikes may have killed the leader of ISIS.But what’s interesting is that even though there were constantly rumors about Baghdadi being killed, Baghdadi being injured, et cetera, when you speak to the people who were really involved and actually tracking him for the U.S. government, what they’ll tell you is that in all of 2014 and all of 2015 and in all of 2016, there was not a single verified, credible sighting of him. So they completely lost him from view. At the same time, the U.S., which had tried to disengage and leave Iraq, is forced to re-engage as ISIS becomes uncontrollable. U.S. troops return to the theater, first to Iraq and then to Syria. Airstrikes begin in both of these countries. And soon, this tide begins to turn, and ISIS, which had been growing its territory, begins to shrink. And little by little, this area that was the size of Great Britain gets smaller and smaller and smaller, until we get to this February and March, where they were down to just one village, one tiny little place called Baghuz, in Syria. A vicious battle ensues, and eventually ISIS’s territorial caliphate is lost. When it is lost and the village of Baghuz is completely emptied, we realize that he’s still nowhere to be found.At this point, you’ve got to believe, though, that they’re closing in on him, right?Look, at this point in time in February, I was six months pregnant, and I made the somewhat extreme decision of going to Syria to cover the war to take back the last village under ISIS rule, specifically because we thought he was going to be there, right? They’ve squeezed them and squeezed them and squeezed them. And having covered this for so long, I just, I couldn’t live with myself with the thought that they were going to capture him in the desert and I would have missed it. But it was pretty anticlimactic when Baghuz finally falls and he’s nowhere to be found.So I end up staying in Syria for almost a month. I’m now close to seven months pregnant. I had to come home, and I come back in early March. March passes. April passes. In April, I have my baby. I start my maternity leave. And in July, we start to hear chatter that they might have found Baghdadi’s whereabouts. And then we don’t hear anything else, until suddenly, this weekend.Last night, the United States brought the world’s number one terrorist leader to justice.What I know is that sometime in the summer, they picked up two key people, one of Baghdadi’s wives and his main courier.It appears that the intelligence began to come together late last week.And these two people were able to provide, during interrogation, enough details that allowed the C.I.A. to then flesh out where he might be hiding.And it was at that point commanders went to President Trump, and he made the decision to go after the world’s most-wanted terrorist.We learned that Delta Forces took off from an air base in Iraq.100 elite U.S. troops in eight helicopters flying in for over an hour.They flew fast and low over the desert into Syria, and they descended on a compound that had a system of tunnels underneath it.Once there, forces blasted a hole through the side of the compound, catching those inside by surprise.Baghdadi was there.Baghdadi fled to an underground tunnel.He retreated into a tunnel.The only ones remaining were Baghdadi in the tunnel, and he had dragged three of his young children with him. They were led to certain death.He was wearing a suicide vest.He reached the end of the tunnel as our dogs chased him down.He ignited his vest, killing himself and the three children. His body was mutilated by the blast. The tunnel had caved in on it in addition. But test results gave certain, immediate and totally positive identification. It was him.So what’s the reaction from ISIS to his death?The reaction so far has been disbelief. I’m seeing on their message boards, don’t believe it. The Islamic State hasn’t confirmed it yet. He’s been declared dead numerous times before. And, of course, they’re right, but this is the first time that the United States, and not just one political party, but the U.S. military, has announced that they believe that he is dead. So I do think this is a big blow for ISIS. And I would say that in some ways, it might even be a bigger deal than losing the territorial caliphate. The issue is that ISIS became so interwoven with this man through this ritual of having their fighters declare allegiance to him and to him alone. So I think that this is going to be disorienting for their fighters. And in the succession battle that is now most likely going to unfold, we know that, according to their own reading of scripture, in order to be a caliph, you have to be descended from the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad. There are plenty of militants. According to the Pentagon, there might be as many as 18,000 members of ISIS still remaining just in Iraq and Syria, but only a small number of those 18,000 are directly descended from the tribe of the Prophet Muhammad. So you now have a much smaller pool of people that you can choose from. Given that the bench is now so obscure, it’s unclear whether the new person is going to be able to rise to the stature and have this cohesive effect over the group, as he had.Rukmini, if we step back and look at how dramatically the politics in Syria have changed over the past month — we’ve seen the president pulling U.S. troops out, seemingly allowing Turkey to attack our Kurdish partners on the ground. What does this raid mean in the context of that massive shift?Well, I think that this raid was rushed as a result of the chaos that has now descended on this corner of the world as a result of American foreign policy. I know from my sources that it wasn’t supposed to happen right now, and I know from them that they had to hurry up and get their acts together because of a fear that as American forces pull out, as we lose the human intelligence that we had set up there, that we would essentially lose eyes on him. And so, to me, it feels like we’re seeing a replay of 2011 all over again. In 2011, we thought that this group had been defeated, and American forces pulled out, and they announced that they were pulling out. So the insurgent group knew that all it has to do is sit tight for a little bit, and pretty soon American forces were going to be out of their way, and they were going to be face to face with Iraqi forces who, even though they were well-equipped, were not able to contain what came after. And I think we’re doing exactly the same thing now. We are leaving this area of the world in chaos. We’re taking our eyes off of it. And it’s as if you’ve put a pot on the fire, and at the moment when you turn your back, it’s not yet boiling. But you walk away and go do something else, and 10 minutes later, that pot is going to be boiling.Thank you so much, Rukmini.Thank you.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today. On Monday, House Democrats changed course and said they would take a formal vote on an impeachment inquiry, after repeatedly resisting calls for one. So far, the impeachment inquiry has deliberately proceeded without such a vote, inviting criticism from congressional Republicans and President Trump, who claimed that the process is secretive and illegitimate. But it now appears that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi believes that there is sufficient support for such a vote that it would give the inquiry greater credibility, and that it would set forth rules for a more public phase of the impeachment, including open hearings.And —I need water.At least two wildfires in or near major California cities intensified on Monday, forcing large-scale evacuations.The sky is on fire right now. Embers raining down all around us now. Look at all the spot fires that just kindled just now.The Kincade fire in Sonoma County, north of San Francisco, has doubled in size in 24 hours, burning at least 66,000 acres, an area nearly twice the size of San Francisco.Get behind him. That’s good. Don’t forget what’s on your left, all right? I want you to knock that down. We want to get in —In anticipation of the fires, California’s largest utility, PG&E, preemptively shut off power to more than 900,000 homes over the weekend, then restored it to some, and is now expected to once again cut power to 500,000 customers later today.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.The United States pushed them to take the fight against ISIS to areas outside their traditional homeland, costing them many lives. It also discouraged them from negotiating a deal with the Syrian government, telling them that sticking with the United States would win them a stake in the country’s future. “We said being associated with the U.S. coalition would put you in a position where you would be represented,” Gen. Joseph L. Votel, former head of the military’s Special Operations and Central Commands, said in a telephone interview. “You’d be on the winning team.”In an effort to placate Turkey, the United States convinced the Kurds to destroy their defenses, softening them up for a Turkish attack. It also sought their help in the United States’ regional struggle with Iran, a cause they had little stake in.For the Kurdish-led forces, the sting was not that American troops were withdrawing from Syria, which they knew would happen eventually. It was that after five years of their fighting and dying alongside American troops in the battle against ISIS  Mr. Trump pulled the plug so suddenly that they were ill-prepared for what came next.“It was a stab in the back,” said Nesrin Abdullah, a spokeswoman for the Kurdish women’s militia. “The Americans kept saying they would not allow the Turks to enter, but in the end that’s what happened.”Part of the problem was that American officials sent conflicting messages about how long the United States would stay in Syria and what it was doing there.Obama administration officials told their Kurdish allies that the partnership would last through the defeat of ISIS, but that the United States would help them play a role in Syria’s future. That message grew even more muddled over the last year, as Mr. Trump vowed to withdraw American troops while other officials in his administration said they would stay until Iran had left the country and there was a political solution in Damascus.While there may not have been explicit promises, to the Kurds these messages pointed to a continued American presence. In fact, even during the weeks before the withdrawal, American diplomats were advising them on programs to improve governance and security — topics that did not suggest an imminent rush for the exit.The swift dissolution of a powerful partnership, reconstructed here through more than a dozen interviews with United States and Kurdish officials, pained not only Syria’s Kurds but also Americans who worked with them to defeat the Islamic State.If the battles served an American agenda, it was the Kurds who died for it. Fewer than a dozen Americans were killed during the anti-ISIS campaign in Syria, compared with 11,000 from the Kurdish-led forces. “We outsourced the dying to them,” said a United States official who worked in Syria, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the issue. “And in the end, we asked them to surrender everything they worked for: the security of their heartland, their political project, and their people. We’re ensuring that those 11,000 died for nothing.” The partnership began by chance during a crisis.By October 2014, three years into Syria’s civil war, the Islamic State had seized territory the size of Britain straddling the Syria-Iraq border. When ISIS set its sights on the poor Kurdish town of Kobani, the United States jumped in, working with Kurdish fighters while launching hundreds of airstrikes on ISIS tanks, artillery pieces and armored vehicles.Polat Can, a senior adviser to the Kurdish militia, said that a joint operations room in northern Iraq was so crowded that Kurdish and American soldiers slept together on the floor. He recalled the Americans’ joy whenever they blew up an ISIS target.The partnership worked. The militants sustained their first major defeat in Syria, and the United States found a reliable Syrian partner.When the conflict in Syria began in 2011 with an uprising against President Bashar al-Assad, the United States tried to back Arab rebels to fight the government, and later to battle the Islamic State. But those efforts failed because of rebel corruption and infighting, defections to extremist groups or lack of American follow-up.Kobani introduced the United States to a new force, a Kurdish militia called the People’s Protection Units, which American officials found to be skilled, disciplined and loyal to a communist-inspired ideology that allowed no sympathy for Islamists.It had come together early in the war to protect Syria’s Kurds, a long-marginalized ethnic minority concentrated in the country’s northeast. But the militia’s roots in the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, a guerrilla movement that has been fighting an insurgency in Turkey for decades, complicated the new partnership.Turkey and the United States consider the group a terrorist organization, but in 2014, American officials were so desperate for allies against ISIS that they overlooked those ties. Turkey did not, and its animosity to the Kurdish fighters in Syria would grow over the coming years.Turkey took particular offense at Mr. Abdi, the Syrian commander who became the Americans’ main interlocutor. Mr. Abdi, also known as Mazlum Kobani, had joined the Kurdish guerrillas during university and become a protégé of the movement’s founder, Abdullah Ocalan. Officials in Turkey and Iraq say Mr. Abdi worked for the group for decades and led a special operations unit that attacked Turkish soldiers.But the Americans found him to be a strategic thinker who kept his promises. A soft-spoken man in his late 40s, Mr. Abdi had short brown hair, a clean-shaven face and a preference for military fatigues and black sneakers. The partnership grew, with the United States providing intelligence, air cover and logistical help as Mr. Abdi’s forces routed ISIS from towns across northern Syria.“The American military saw what could be done with local, indigenous fighters who had a will to fight hard, take instruction and were trusted not to shoot U.S. forces in the back,” said Nicholas A. Heras, a fellow at the Center for a New American Security who has advised Kurdish forces in Syria.As Mr. Abdi’s forces advanced, they allied with Christian, Arab and other militias, rebranding themselves in 2015 as the Syrian Democratic Forces, or S.D.F.After the group’s victories in northern Syria, the United States wanted it to pivot south, toward the predominantly Arab provinces of Raqqa and Deir al-Zour, where the Islamic State was strongest. Some Kurds resisted, asking why their youth should die for Arab lands and questioning the United States’ commitment to their people.But their leader decided that leaving ISIS anywhere in Syria would be a threat, and top American officials reassured the Kurds that the United States would secure them a place in the country’s future.“There were people saying, ‘Why are you going to Raqqa?” said Nasir Haj Mansour, a Syrian Kurdish researcher who is close to the S.D.F. leadership. “I told them: ‘If we don’t fight ISIS there, it will come fight us here. Now we have an opportunity with the international coalition to get rid of this organization for the good of everyone.'”United States military assistance increased. American advisers taught Syrian fighters infantry tactics, first aid, bomb defusal and reconnaissance skills for American airstrikes.In October 2017, backed by American jets and armed with machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades, they seized Raqqa, the ISIS capital, where they embarrassed their American partners and angered Turkey by unfurling a banner of Mr. Ocalan, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party founder, in a downtown square.In the areas it liberated, the S.D.F. established local councils that followed its philosophy of community rule and gender equality.American officials never endorsed the Kurds’ political project but made repeated if vague promises to help secure their political future. “Truthfully, we didn’t have a solid plan for how it would end,” Gen. Tony Thomas, a former head of the military’s Special Operations Command, said on CBS’s “Face the Nation” last week. “But they believed that they would be part of the fabric of the future of Syria.”Last December, Mr. Trump suddenly announced on Twitter that he was withdrawing the roughly 2,000 American troops in Syria because ISIS had been defeated, calling that “my only reason for being there.”The decision baffled the Kurdish-led forces, who were still locked in fierce battles with the Islamic State and would not rout the group from its last patch of territory for another three months.The withdrawal decision angered Mr. Trump’s Republican allies in Congress and even members of his administration.Defense Secretary Jim Mattis resigned, as did Brett McGurk, the presidential envoy for the fight against the Islamic State, who both considered it a mistake. Since Mr. Trump took office, top administration officials had said the American presence in Syria was not just to ensure the end of the militants but also to press for political change in Damascus and push out Iran.The Kurds wanted continued United States help against ISIS and sought political change in Damascus, but resisted joining the struggle with Iran, especially given the United States’ shaky commitment, Kurdish officials said.Mr. Trump compromised, ordering the military to reduce the American presence to 1,000 troops, while United States officials hinted at a longer-term presence.Throughout the war, the Kurds had never joined the rebels against Mr. al-Assad’s government, and kept lines open in case they needed to reconcile. But Trump administration officials told them American partners should not talk to American enemies, Mr. Abdi has said, so they froze talks with the Syrian government.When Turkey threatened to invade northern Syria to sweep Kurdish forces off its border, the United States carried out a plan that required the Kurds to blow up tunnels, destroy trenches and dig up ammunition caches they had put in place to defend against a possible Turkish attack.Many Kurds feared the plan would leave them vulnerable, but Mr. Abdi carried it out, convinced that the United States would ensure his people’s safety. The partnership appeared to be solid: The United States was seeking Kurdish help for the most sensitive of missions, the hunt for Mr. al-Baghdadi. After American officials determined that he could be in Idlib Province, in northeastern Syria, the Kurdish-led force sent spies who watched the house, determined how many rooms it had and who was in it, and found a tunnel underneath, according to Mr. Abdi and a Kurdish intelligence officer. During the raid, Mr. al-Baghdadi fled into the tunnel with three children and blew himself up, killing them all.The Kurdish spies also stole the terrorist leader’s boxer shorts and obtained a blood sample through what Mr. Abdi called “intelligence work.”DNA testing confirmed that Mr. al-Baghdadi was inside, and Mr. Abdi’s spies kept watch while the United States planned the raid to get him.They were still waiting on Oct. 6, when Mr. Trump announced after a phone call with Mr. Erdogan that he was removing American troops from the path of a Turkish attack on the United States’ Syrian partners.The ensuing fighting killed more than 200 people and delayed the raid on Mr. al-Baghdadi’s villa as Mr. Abdi’s forces shifted their focus to fighting the Turks.Some American officials watched in dread as Turkey attacked the very zone where the Kurds had removed their defenses.“You tricked us!” Mr. Abdi, the Kurdish commander, yelled at American officials.Kurdish officials rushed to the Syrian government for help, but instead of bargaining from a position of strength, they now began talks under fire.The feeling of betrayal consumed not just the Kurds but much of northeastern Syria, where residents who had felt protected by the United States feared Turkey and Mr. al-Assad’s troops.“The Americans betrayed the Kurds,” Farhan Mohammed, a Kurdish ice merchant, shouted as an American convoy passed his shop on its way out of Syria last week. His friends yelled insults and flashed the thumbs-down. “Our whole future is determined by Trump’s tweets,” he said.Mr. Trump has stood by his decision.“We never agreed to protect the Kurds for the rest of their lives,” he said this month adding that a small contingent of troops would remain in Syria’s east at the request of Israel and Jordan and to “protect the oil.”Other than that, he said, there was “no reason” to remain.“Perhaps it’s time for the Kurds to start heading to the oil region,” he said in a tweet on Thursday, seeming to suggest another mission for the Kurds. But the Kurds are busy resisting further Turkish advances that they fear could amount to the ethnic cleansing of Kurds from their homeland.Kurdish leaders say they hoped five years of cooperation could have ended with more respect for their sacrifices.“All of a sudden you give it up and give it to the regime and Russia and Iran,” said Mr. Can, the S.D.F. adviser. “After that, who is going to trust the Americans and help them? No one.”Despite their anger, the Kurds have not cut ties with the United States.Mr. Abdi, their leader, has spoken twice by phone with Mr. Trump and there is talk of his visiting Washington. And the Kurds have not rejected Mr. Trump’s suggestion that some Kurdish fighters remain in eastern Syria to protect the oil facilities. But the trust in the White House is gone.“The situation has changed,” said Ilman Ehmed, a top Kurdish official who was in Washington last week to speak with other American officials about continuing cooperation. “But we still trust the fact that we have many friends among the American people. In the House of Representatives. The Senate. And military leaders. I trust their support.”Ben Hubbard reported from Qamishli, Syria, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.Advertisement