https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/26/us/politics/trump-impeachment.html
Trump Impeachment Inquiry Updates: The Complaint, the Testimony, the Reaction - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
63
AdvertisementSupported byA whistle-blower’s complaint accused President Trump of using his office to try to get Ukraine to help him in 2020. The acting intelligence chief told Congress that the controversy is “unprecedented.”By Nicholas Fandos“In the course of my duties, I have received information from multiple U.S. government officials that the President of the United States is using the power of his office to solicit interference from a foreign country in the 2020 U.S. election.” Thus began an explosive criminal complaint drafted by an American intelligence officer and released by the House Intelligence Committee on Thursday. At the center of the whistle-blower’s complaint is a July call between Mr. Trump and President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. Mr. Trump brought up American aid to that country — without explicitly mentioning that he had just frozen a military aid package of hundreds of millions of dollars — and then pressed the Ukrainian leader to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.The whistle-blower, who did not listen directly to the call, also said that in an attempt to “lock down” all records of the call, White House lawyers told officials to move the transcript into a separate system reserved for classified information that is especially sensitive. These actions, the whistle-blower suggested, showed that those involved “understood the gravity of what had transpired.” The complaint goes on to say the president’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, is “a central figure in this effort,” but that Attorney General William P. Barr “appears to be involved as well.”White House officials dismissed the significance of the document. “Nothing has changed with the release of this complaint, which is nothing more than a collection of thirdhand accounts of events and cobbled-together press clippings — all of which shows nothing improper,” the press secretary Stephanie Grisham said. She added, “The White House will continue to push back on the hysteria and false narratives being peddled by Democrats and many in the mainstream media.”Read on: White House Tried to ‘Lock Down’ Ukraine Call Records, Whistle-Blower SaysAnd more: 8 Takeaways From the Whistle-Blower ComplaintThe man has since returned to the C.I.A., according to three people familiar with his identity. Little else is known about him. His complaint suggested he was an analyst by training and made clear he was steeped in details of American policy toward Europe, demonstrating a sophisticated understanding of Ukrainian politics and at least some knowledge of the law. The whistle-blower’s expertise will likely add to lawmakers’ confidence about the merits of his complaint, and tamp down allegations that he might have misunderstood what he learned about Mr. Trump.Lawyers for the whistle-blower refused to confirm that he worked for the C.I.A. and said that publishing information about him was dangerous.“Any decision to report any perceived identifying information of the whistle-blower is deeply concerning and reckless, as it can place the individual in harm’s way,” said Andrew Bakaj, his lead counsel. “The whistle-blower has a right to anonymity.” Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The New York Times, said The Times was right to publish information about the whistle-blower. “The role of the whistle-blower, including his credibility and his place in the government, is essential to understanding one of the most important issues facing the country — whether the president of the United States abused power and whether the White House covered it up.”[Our executive editor, Dean Baquet, addressed readers’ concerns about the decision to publish limited information about the whistle-blower.]— Adam Goldman, Michael S. Schmidt and Julian E. BarnesRead on: Whistle-Blower Is a C.I.A. Officer Who Was Detailed to the White House “I want to know who’s the person who gave the whistle-blower the information because that’s close to a spy,” Mr. Trump on Thursday morning told staff from the United States Mission to the United Nations. “You know what we used to do in the old days when we were smart with spies and treason, right? We used to handle it a little differently than we do now.”The remark stunned the audience, according to a person briefed on what took place, who had notes of the president’s comments. Mr. Trump condemned Mr. Biden’s role in Ukraine at a time when his son Hunter Biden was on the board of a Ukrainian energy company, and said the whistle-blower never heard the call in question.When he returned from New York, Mr. Trump resumed his diatribe against Democrats. “There should be a way of stopping it, maybe legally through the courts,” he said.Republicans largely stayed in line behind Mr. Trump. In a statement to Politico, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, dismissed as “laughable” the Democrats’ assertion that Mr. Trump’s behavior in the Ukraine matter should lead to his impeachment.Representative Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader, complained that the whistle-blower “has no primary sources,” even though the complaint makes clear that the author spoke to numerous people with direct knowledge of the call. Some Republicans sounded more cautious. Representative Will Hurd, a moderate Texas Republican who has announced he will not run for re-election, wrote on Twitter that the complaint was “concerning” and needs to be fully investigated.Read on: Trump Attacks Whistle-Blower’s Sources and Alludes to Punishment for SpiesJoseph Maguire, the acting director of national intelligence at the center of the fight over a whistle-blower complaint about President Trump’s dealings with Ukraine, said the whistle-blower “acted in good faith” and that “everything here in this matter is totally unprecedented.”In fact, he told Representative Raja Krishnamoorthi, Democrat of Illinois, that he would not have accepted the post of acting director of national intelligence if he knew of the case.Facing tough questioning from Republicans and Democrats, he defended both the whistle-blower’s actions and his handling of the case, which he called “urgent and important.”The White House did not order him to keep the complaint from Congress, he said. His delay was about sorting through possible claims of executive privilege. As the hearing wound down, the spy chief said the matter was in Congress’s hands. “My responsibility was to get you the whistle-blower letter and get the other information released. I have done my duty,” he told the committee. Whether to investigate further “is on the shoulders of the legislative branch and this committee.”Speaker Nancy Pelosi, echoing the language of Watergate, accused the White House of engaging in “a cover-up” of the Ukraine affair, citing a whistle-blower complaint that said Trump administration officials worked to “lock down” all records of a call between President Trump and Ukraine’s president.“This is a cover-up,” Ms. Pelosi told reporters at her weekly news conference.The speaker refused to discuss a timeline for the impeachment inquiry she only embraced this week, but she did indicate that the consensus in the House Democratic Caucus is that the inquiry should concentrate on Ukraine.“The inquiry and the consensus in our caucus is that our focus now is on this allegation,” she said.Several Democratic presidential candidates also accused Mr. Trump of attempting to hide his call with Ukraine’s leader after the complaint’s release.At least five candidates — Senators Kamala Harris, Amy Klobuchar, Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, and the former housing secretary Julián Castro — all accused Mr. Trump of a “cover-up.”Read on: How the Impeachment Process Works Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Katie Benner contributed reporting from Washington and Maggie Haberman, Katie Glueck and Matt Stevens from New York.Advertisement