https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/31/us/politics/mcgahn-kupperman-testimony-lawsuits.html
Trump’s Claim That Aides Are Immune From Testifying Is Tested in Courts - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
143
AdvertisementSupported byA parallel clash over Congress’s power to get information and the president’s power to keep it secret played out in two courtrooms.By Charlie SavageWASHINGTON — A federal judge on Thursday sharply questioned a Justice Department lawyer about President Trump’s attempt to block a congressional subpoena to his former White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, suggesting that the Trump administration’s legal arguments posed a threat to constitutional checks and balances.In a lengthy and lively argument, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson grilled the department lawyer, James Burnham, about the executive branch’s theory that Mr. McGahn is absolutely immune from being compelled to testify — meaning he does not even have to show up — and that the House cannot ask courts to enforce its subpoenas against executive branch officials.“The House can never go to court?” Judge Jackson asked.“As a general matter, I think that is correct,” Mr. Burnham replied, adding: “The Constitution does not allow this. It does not allow the House and the executive branch to sue each other in court.”But a lawyer for the House, Megan Barbero, pointed to prior rulings by district court judges during the George W. Bush and Obama administrations holding that Congress could file such lawsuits and that top presidential aides must show up in response to a subpoena. Mr. Burnham maintained that the courts wrongly decided those precedents, which are not binding.Mr. McGahn is a key witness to several of the most important episodes in the report by the former special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, about Mr. Trump’s attempts to obstruct the Russia investigation, including when he sought to have Mr. Mueller fired and later pressured Mr. McGahn to write a memo falsely denying that he had done so.The House Judiciary Committee sued Mr. McGahn in August after he defied its subpoena on Mr. Trump’s instructions. Meanwhile, two hours into the McGahn case hearing, another Federal District Court judge in the same Washington courthouse, Richard Leon, held the opening hearing in a lawsuit brought by Mr. Trump’s former deputy national security adviser, Charles Kupperman, that raises many of the same legal issues.The House Intelligence Committee has subpoenaed Mr. Kupperman to testify about Mr. Trump’s use of his official powers to pressure Ukraine into announcing investigations that could benefit him politically, and the White House has told him that he has absolute immunity and should not show up.Mr. Kupperman’s lawyer, Charles Cooper, filed an unusual lawsuit against both the House and Mr. Trump, saying his client was caught between conflicting demands from two branches of government and wanted a judge to tell him which side was right so that he did not inadvertently violate his oath to uphold the Constitution.“Kupperman is in a classic Catch-22,” Mr. Cooper said, adding, “He cannot satisfy both of them, but he is perfectly prepared to satisfy whichever command this court says is valid.”Mr. Cooper also represents John R. Bolton, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, whom the House is also moving to subpoena, and the judge raised the possibility that Mr. Bolton might file an identical case that would be joined to the Kupperman matter. Mr. Cooper did not confirm that Mr. Bolton would but said if he sued, the case would raise identical legal issues and would not require more time for briefings and arguments.Judge Leon also noted that earlier on Thursday, the House voted, largely along party lines, for a resolution setting rules for the coming public phase of the impeachment inquiry and providing the first endorsement by the full chamber for the effort, which the resolution styled as already “ongoing.” When previously instructing officials to ignore impeachment-related subpoenas, the Trump White House has argued that the lack of such a vote meant the inquiry was a sham. Judge Leon asked a House lawyer, Todd B. Tatelman, whether the committee would issue a new subpoena to Mr. Kupperman in light of the vote. Mr. Tatelman said he was not sure but maintained that the existing subpoenas were lawful.Mr. Tatelman and Elizabeth Shapiro, a Justice Department lawyer, both told Judge Leon that they would file motions to dismiss the case, arguing that for technical reasons, Mr. Kupperman had no right to sue. Mr. Cooper said he would argue that the lawsuit is valid, but then step back and make no arguments about which branch was right on the legal merits.Judge Leon set a schedule that would queue up arguments on Dec. 10. That included requiring Mr. Kupperman’s legal team to file a brief on Nov. 27, the day before Thanksgiving, and the two government branches to respond to it a week later. When Ms. Shapiro pointed out that such a quick turnaround would interfere with Thanksgiving weekend, Judge Leon lectured her.“When it’s a matter of this importance to the country, you roll your sleeves up and get the job done,” he said. “Vacations and other distractions take second place.”Advertisement