https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/02/health/vaping-illnesses.html
Lung Damage From Vaping Resembles Chemical Burns, Report Says - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
45
AdvertisementSupported byDoctors at the Mayo Clinic examined samples of lung tissue from 17 patients, all of which looked as if the people had been exposed to toxic chemicals, the researchers said. By Denise GradyThe lung damage in some people who have become ill after vaping nicotine or marijuana products resembles a chemical burn, doctors from the Mayo Clinic reported on Wednesday.Their findings are based on samples of lung tissue from 17 patients around the country whose biopsy specimens were sent to Mayo to be examined under the microscope by experts in lung pathology. Two samples came from patients who died.“All 17 of our cases show a pattern of injury in the lung that looks like a toxic chemical exposure, a toxic chemical fume exposure, or a chemical burn injury,” said Dr. Brandon T. Larsen, a surgical pathologist at the Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale, Ariz. “To be honest, they look like the kind of change you would expect to see in an unfortunate worker in an industrial accident where a big barrel of toxic chemicals spills, and that person is exposed to toxic fumes and there is a chemical burn in the airways.”The injuries also look like those seen in people exposed to poisons like mustard gas, a chemical weapon used in World War I, he said. The findings were published on Wednesday in The New England Journal of Medicine and involved samples from 13 men and four women whose ages ranged from 19 to 67. About 70 percent had a history of vaping marijuana or cannabis oils. Eleven were in Arizona, five in Minnesota and one in Florida. [Maps and charts that show the spread of lung injuries and deaths related to vaping.] More than 800 cases of lung illness in 46 states have been linked to vaping, and 16 people have died. The majority have vaped THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, but some say they have vaped only nicotine.Medical investigators have been unable to identify exactly what is causing the lung damage, or even how many harmful substances are involved. They do not know whether the source is the liquids being vaped, or a toxin released from the materials used to make vaping devices. It is also unclear whether some devices used in vaping may be defective. Initial concerns have focused on the possibility that the lungs were clogged by oils being vaped, like THC oil itself, or other oils like vitamin E acetate that are sometimes used to dilute or “cut” THC for sale. But Dr. Larsen said the Mayo researchers saw no signs of oil accumulating in the lung tissue. Instead, they saw many immune cells called macrophages with what he described as “the fine, foamy-looking appearance that is characteristic of chemical injuries.”transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: When John Steffen died, his family had little doubt that a lifetime of cigarette smoking was to blame. Then, the Nebraska Department of Health got an unusual tip. Part 1 of a two-part series on the promise and the peril of vaping. It’s Monday, October 28.You will see the animals on the wall. So, there’s a rainbow trout and an antelope and a deer above the fireplace. So, yeah.Julie, tell me about this trip you took to Nebraska.So, a couple of weeks ago, I went to Omaha, Nebraska.Julie Bosman is a national reporter at The Times.And I went to the home of Kathleen Fimple —You guys can sit —— where she lives with her dog, Bo, a little terrier. And Kathleen showed me around her house.That room’s a mess, but we could pull some things off —And I sat down with Kathleen and her daughter, Dulcia, and her granddaughter, and they showed me something that Dulcia had made after the death of her father, John Steffen.My daughter made this.It was a glass box.That’s what we used for the funeral.And inside were mementos that represented his life.He played guitar, so we’ve got guitar picks, and “Grandma’s Feather Bed” was a song we all liked to sing together.So John was a very active outdoorsman. There was a turkey feather from one of his hunting expeditions.There’s a shotgun shell, there’s the antler — this knife has an antler.There were badges and pins.He was a Scout leader.And there were dried flowers from his funeral spray.Those were from the casket spray.And how exactly did he die?So, John died after a long illness.He was a lifelong smoker.What did he smoke?Marlboros.Not the lights, the —Oh, no. No, no.So he started smoking back in the ‘60s when he was a teenager, and it was a habit that he really stuck with for most of his life.How did he feel about his smoking? Was he like, “Ugh, I hate this,” or, “I love it, and I don’t want to quit.” Or how —I love it, and I don’t want to quit. And also, a lot of denial, especially early on. My grandpa lived to be, whatever, 80-something, and he smoked.So he was kind of clinging to the idea that smoking wasn’t bad.Eventually, I think he reconciled that, yes, smoking was bad, and it could cause cancer.He tried very, very hard to quit.In his 30s, while we were first married, he quit several times briefly.Sometimes he would be successful, and then he started up again.He’d stop for a month or two, and then, yeah.And his daughter, when she had her own baby daughter, she would take little pictures of the baby and tuck them into his packs of cigarettes.So that he would see her face every time he pulled out a cigarette. I was like, O.K., I’ve tried all the little tactics.So, she tried everything she could, but his addiction to nicotine was decades strong.But then he developed C.O.P.D., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which is a very common disease that many smokers develop. And in his case, it gave him a very bad cough, and it made it difficult to breathe at times.We’d go to church, and he sing a line, and then he’d stop, and then he’d have to pick it up later because he’d have to catch his breath in between. And he used to whistle all the time — he couldn’t whistle anymore.He had atrial fibrillation, and sometime later, he got non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and had to have chemotherapy for years.I think that was when he started vaping.Do you know how he got the idea?No. We both, I had kind of seen advertisements for it and things, but it was his idea, and he bought one and came home with it.So, John started vaping about five years ago.Do you know which brand?Mistics.Then he had blu, and then he went to Juul.And he only went to Juul less than a year ago.And he had heard about vaping as the cleaner, healthier alternative to cigarettes. So he became just as enthusiastic of a vaper as he was a smoker. So, earlier this year —There was a cough, cold going around —It was a cold winter, and everybody had a cold, and a cough. And John kind of got it the worst.And it probably, in some ways, was less obvious to us because he had a smoker’s cough. So he coughed, but it was also obvious that this was worse.And his daughter, Dulcia, started nagging at him, and saying, Dad, you really need to go to the doctor.That’s probably why he went, though, in April, just because you kept pushing him.Yeah.So he did, and he was diagnosed with pneumonia.Dr. Simon said, “You have pneumonia, and you’re going to the hospital.”And he was in the hospital for a week. And seven, eight days into his hospital stay —His hands were like ice.They were starting to turn blue.He couldn’t blink, and his mouth was propped open, and he wasn’t breathing very often. And his last breath I could tell because there was just a slight twitch in his neck.He died of acute respiratory failure, which the doctor said was a consequence of the C.O.P.D.So essentially, he died of smoking, or smoking-related lung disease, it sounds like.Yes. His wife said that he always believed that he was going to die of lung cancer. So when the doctors said that he had died, essentially, as a consequence of C.O.P.D., they had no reason to question the doctor’s conclusion.And as tragic as that is, it all kind of lines up with our understanding of what a lifetime of smoking does to a person.Right. But then four months after John died, Kathleen was sitting at work one day.I was in a meeting when the Department of Health called.She got a phone call from an investigator at the Nebraska Department of Health, and he asked her all kinds of questions.He asked about any exposure in the past to moldy wood, or wood chips, to asbestos, to pesticides. Then they asked about symptoms.He asked if he had had any kind of vomiting before his death.Did he lose weight, was he coughing?And he also asked her about vaping.I said, I don’t know why vaping — I mean, yes, he vaped, but I don’t think it’s from vaping. They said he had pneumonia. Lifelong smoker, C.O.P.D. —And the investigator got off the phone with her and said he would be in touch.So Julie, what was John’s relationship to vaping?Kathleen told me that when he was smoking cigarettes, he would smoke a cigarette two or three times an hour. And very quickly, he was vaping two or three times an hour.It was a straight replacement for cigarettes.Yeah.Yeah, and part of it was habit. Years and years of habit, when you get in the vehicle, you light up a cigarette. So when he’d get in the vehicle and start to drive, he would vape.It was a good way to help him get his nicotine fix.I knew it wasn’t the perfect solution, but again, figured it was better.Right.For him, and for us.Did you ever think, could they be dangerous?No. No, I —You know, when they first marketed them, they said it was a safer alternative. We assumed it was healthier for those around him as well.And then a few days later, Kathleen spoke to the medical investigator again, and he told her that it had been confirmed. John was Nebraska’s first official vaping-related death.This morning, Nebraska health officials have announced the state’s first vaping-related death.That’s right, the person was over 65, and from the Douglas County, which is the Omaha area. The individual died in May, but the State Health Department just identified it as vaping-related.So Julie, what exactly is going on here? Why is an original conclusion about John’s cause of death now being re-evaluated, and, it seems, challenged? What is happening?So, back in May, when John died, there really was no such thing as a vaping-related death or a vaping-related illness. But throughout the summer, all these illnesses and deaths began to be reported. And all over the country, people began to look back at cases of people who had died, people who had gotten sick, and started to think a little differently about them. And in Nebraska, the State Health Department wouldn’t have even looked at John’s death if they hadn’t received a tip.We’ll be right back.So Julie, tell me about this tip.So, here’s what happened.John had an old friend who he went to high school with, and they saw each other at an alumni reunion a few years ago. They sat together with their spouses at this dinner, and throughout the dinner, as she described it, John was vaping constantly. And she had never seen anyone vape before. This was in 2014, it was kind of a new thing. And she told me that she was very alarmed by what she saw.What exactly alarmed her?She was concerned because he was vaping so frequently. Of course, when you smoke, you generally have to go outside and do it. But John was vaping indoors, sitting at dinner. And she also just had this kind of gut sense that there was something kind of wrong about it. And she couldn’t quite shake the feeling, even after the reunion was over and years had gone by. And she and John really didn’t keep in touch, but earlier this year, when John was sick, she had heard that he was in the hospital. And then she heard that he died in May. So she waited all summer, and she started seeing things in the news about people getting sick and dying from vaping.There is breaking news tonight in the nationwide vaping crisis. Another death, and new reports of possible lung disease. The C.D.C. is looking into dozens of cases.The C.D.C. can confirm 31 cases —200 potential cases —380 cases —The 450 cases span —530 cases —It’s unclear just what’s causing the problem. The C.D.C. says it will continue to investigate.And she told me that she kept looking in the paper, she kept looking on the news to see if John was one of those people, and that never happened. So at the end of the summer, she decided that she just couldn’t get rid of this feeling that vaping was related to his death, so she called the State Health Department.So she was the tip.Yeah, so her tip gets passed along to a medical investigator, and he was the investigator who called John’s wife and spoke to her, and interviewed her about his medical history.He did a bunch of other things, too. So he spoke to the physicians who attended to John, who treated him when he was sick in the hospital in Omaha. He examined his medical records, he looked at his chest X-rays.And it showed pneumonia in the lower lobe of one lung. But the rest of his lungs, both sides and upper and lower were filled with what they call ground glass opacity.A ground glass appearance on the lungs is an injury to the lung that is typically consistent with vaping. And in some cases, it can look like there are kind of opaque white spots on the X-ray.And I said, well, how does that — is that different from just a long-term smoker? And he said, yes. This is not what you would see in just, routine, if you will, long-term smoking.And in this case, it was a very key piece of evidence for the investigator who was looking into John’s death.And what’s the understanding of how vaping might create this kind of ground glass-looking damage in the lung?So when you vape, of course, you use a device that heats liquid to a very high temperature, and turns it into a vapor that you inhale. Now, that liquid can contain THC, which is the ingredient in marijuana that gets you high, or it could contain nicotine. And doctors who are investigating all these illnesses and deaths don’t know exactly what it is about vaping that is making people sick. But they have noticed that some of the people who have gotten sick, or died, have had the ground glass appearance on their lungs. Or in some cases, they’ve had damage on their lungs that resembles a chemical burn.Julie, my sense is that most of these vaping-related illnesses and the deaths that we have been reading about have been not from the well-known e-cigarette brands, but from basically counterfeit and bootleg products, right?Yes. So here’s what we know about that. Of the people who have gotten sick or died from vaping in the last year, about three-quarters of them have vaped THC products. A little over half have vaped nicotine, and a lot of people do both, kind of toggle back and forth between vaping weed and vaping nicotine. But as best we can tell, John did not vape THC. When I asked his family, they kind of laughed at the idea that their 68-year-old husband and father would be procuring bootleg THC.Is that unthinkable? Do you have any — I mean, is that something that he might have possibly done?I don’t think he would have even known where to go to get it.We’ve been to Colorado since it was legalized, and he wouldn’t touch it.He was never interested.No. So I don’t think he would have ever considered getting it black-market, either.They described his vaping habits as very aboveboard.Do you know where he bought it?Walmart. Walgreens or Walmart.Walgreens or Walmart.I don’t think he bought them anyplace else.He never went to any of the vape shops or anything.Oh, never. Never.I mean, is it possible that John was vaping something like THC, but just didn’t tell his family? That no one knew?His family very strongly discounts that possibility. He would have had to be doing it in secret, and they thought that that notion was rather ridiculous.So if he got sick from vaping, it was from regular old — I guess if the industry is old enough to call it this, but — traditional vaping?Yes. And this really only deepens the medical mystery surrounding vaping, because so many people who have gotten sick or died from vaping have been using THC vapes, and especially vaping devices or cartridges that were bought off the street, and no one really knows where they came from.But that’s not the case with John.Right.So Julie, how does John’s death, as defined and diagnosed by these medical professionals, locally and nationally, how does it change our understanding of vaping and its consequences?I think that his death raises an alarming possibility. And that is that someone who apparently did not vape THC, did not buy any kind of products on the black market, could also become very sick and die from a vaping-related illness.Right. And his family told you that he took up vaping, as many people do, because he thought it was actually going to make him healthier. It was going to help him quit smoking.Yeah. He thought that this would be the thing that would help him quit smoking for good, and it did. And you know, people like John Steffen are exactly the kind of person that e-cigarettes were ostensibly created for. When e-cigarettes were invented, and when companies started selling them on the mass market, they said that it was for people who wanted to quit smoking and wanted a healthier alternative. And John was exactly that person.So what’s the understanding of why so many people, not just John, but hundreds of people are getting sick from this, and maybe even dying from it?Well, I would just point to cigarette smoking and when it was first introduced. Cigarette smoking really took off during World War I among American men. And it wasn’t until the 1930s when doctors began to link an increase in lung cancer rates to an increase in cigarette smoking. And it took decades after that — it wasn’t until 1964 when the surgeon general released a landmark report saying, yes, smoking does cause lung cancer. So I think what a lot of doctors out there are saying is that it is far too early to know what the long-term effects of vaping might be.In other words, the gestation period for any kind of public health problem is long, is maybe even decades.Yes. And it’s very early in e-cigarettes’ life. I mean, they really didn’t enter the mainstream until the last 10 years.In which case, we would be at the beginning of whatever this is, not even the middle, and definitely nowhere near the end.I think we can say for sure that the C.D.C. believes that there are many, many more cases coming, and that this is only the tip of the iceberg.Julie, does John’s family think that he would still be alive today if he hadn’t taken up vaping?That’s a difficult question. It’s something that they do think about. And when they look back on his life, they know that taking up smoking as a teenager was certainly a bad decision, and continuing to smoke all those decades was something that they wish he had not done. But they thought that he made a really good decision when he switched to vaping. They didn’t worry about the health consequences of vaping. And when his daughter looked at the vaping container that was left over, sitting on the coffee table, she doesn’t see something that is harmless or something that might have helped prolong his life. She sees something very dangerous.To think that that box right there could be the sole reason he’s dead, in some ways, is like looking at a gun with a bullet. It’s just a method of death.Julie, thank you very much.Thanks, Michael.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.Last night, the United States brought the world’s number one terrorist leader to justice. Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is dead.On Sunday, President Trump announced that the founder and leader of the Islamic State died during a U.S. military operation in Syria.Capturing or killing Baghdadi has been the top national security priority of my administration.Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi inspired thousands of men and women from across the world to join ISIS, and in 2014 created a caliphate for the terrorist group that at its height was the size of Britain and imposed a brutal form of Islam on its inhabitants.The thug who tried so hard to intimidate others spent his last moments in utter fear, in total panic and dread, terrified of the American forces bearing down on him.After years of eluding American forces, al-Baghdadi was recently discovered in northwest Syria, where U.S. commandos chased him into a tunnel. There, he detonated a suicide vest that killed himself and three of his young children.He was a sick and depraved man, and now he’s gone.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.“So maybe we need to look more closely at the chemical compounds, and not just oils, but the chemical constituents, to figure out which ones are injurious,” Dr. Larsen said.He said patients with lung illness from vaping had tissue damage and cell death in the lining of their airways, and in the lungs themselves. As the body reacts and tries to heal, the tissue swells and can narrow the airways. Dead cells slough off into the airways, blocking them further, and fluids leak into the lungs’ air sacs.The swelling, tissue damage and fluid buildup can make it impossible to breathe.“The lung is not very functional when it’s been damaged and is trying to repair itself,” Dr. Larsen said, adding that the lungs and airways have essentially been “torched.”“There’s no reserve left while the body tries to heal itself, so people will be really sick, on a ventilator because they can’t get enough oxygen in, or carbon dioxide out,” he said. “Some patients will not recover, and will end up dying.”He said it was too soon tell whether the survivors’ lungs would fully recover.“Based on the severity of injury we see, at least in some of these cases, I wouldn’t be surprised if we wind up with people down the road having chronic respiratory problems from this,” Dr. Larsen said. “Some seem to recover. I don’t think we know what the long-term consequences will be.”Two of the cases included in the Mayo Clinic report occurred before 2019, and Dr. Larsen said he suspected that the condition had existed for some time, years perhaps, but that the cases were scattered and the cause was not recognized. For decades, doctors have asked patients whether they had a history of smoking traditional cigarettes, but until very recently, not about vaping. “As we become more attuned, I think we’ll see more and more of this, and we may see more risks than we initially realized,” he said. The patients described in the Mayo report included a 31-year-old woman who died, despite extensive treatment with steroids and even a machine to pump oxygen directly into her bloodstream. Her lungs were so damaged that even a ventilator could not give her enough air. She had a history of vaping, but there was no information about what she vaped.Another patient was a 21-year-old man who reported vaping nicotine for five years, and who became ill shortly after adding marijuana to it for the first time. He recovered well enough to leave the hospital. A 28-year-old man listed in the report had, for a year, been vaping 20 to 30 cartridges a day and also vaping THC. Last Friday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified several names of THC-related products in prefilled cartridges that they said patients had reported using before becoming ill. Dank Vapes, Moon Rocks, Off White and TKO were among those listed by health officials who interviewed patients in Wisconsin and Illinois. But officials said they did not know if vaping illnesses or deaths in other parts of the country were related to the same THC labels identified in those two states. Officials also said that Dank Vapes was not an actual brand, but just a label and packaging that anyone selling THC vaping liquid could buy and stick on a product. The extensive use of prefilled THC cartridges suggests they might play an important role in the outbreak, the C.D.C. said. According to the C.D.C. report last week, of 771 patients nationwide in the outbreak, 91 percent had been hospitalized; 69 percent were male; and a little more than 60 percent were between the ages of 18 and 34. Of the 13 known deaths at the end of last week, the C.D.C. said that nearly 60 percent were of men, and the median age was 50 years old.Nebraska, Virginia and New Jersey reported deaths this week, bringing the total to 16. Many of the patients who died were older with underlying illnesses, although few details about them have been released. [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Advertisement