https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/26/us/philip-reeker-testimony.html
Official Says Attempts to Rally Top State Officials Behind Ukraine Ambassador Failed - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
102
AdvertisementSupported byPhilip T. Reeker offered additional details on the unexpected ouster of the ambassador to Ukraine. By Nicholas Fandos and Sharon LaFraniereWASHINGTON — A top diplomat told impeachment investigators on Saturday that he repeatedly pressed top State Department leaders, in vain, to defend the United States ambassador to Ukraine in the face of false attacks that he said were orchestrated by the president’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani. The account by Philip T. Reeker, the acting assistant secretary in charge of European and Eurasian Affairs, underscored the bewilderment in American diplomatic ranks over the State Department’s decision in May to recall Marie L. Yovanovitch, a highly respected career diplomat and the top American official in Ukraine, months before her term was up.Mr. Reeker’s testimony, which lasted about eight hours and was delivered behind closed doors, also showcased the degree to which senior State Department officials were aware that Mr. Giuliani, who had no formal government role, was an important player on issues involving Ukraine. But Mr. Reeker shed little light on the question at the heart of the impeachment inquiry: whether President Trump pressured the new Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky, for his own political gain, according to several people familiar with his testimony.Another key diplomat testified this week that Mr. Trump had withheld an Oval Office meeting and $391 million worth of military aid in an effort to force Ukraine to publicly announce that his country was investigating Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his son, who was on the board of a Ukrainian gas company. Ukraine desperately needed the aid, which had been approved by Congress, to fight pro-Russian forces waging a separatist war in eastern Ukraine.But Mr. Reeker, a meticulous if plodding witness who showed up with and repeatedly referred to a thick binder of documents, testified that he had not been privy to those discussions. “An honest assessment by both sides is that there were no aha moments for either side,” Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, said outside the closed hearing room in the bowels of the Capitol.The unusual weekend interview suggested the fast-moving impeachment inquiry could be accelerating as it enters its second month. House Democrats have scheduled six more depositions with potentially consequential witnesses in the coming week. They plan to conduct more than one interview a day in an effort to clear the way for public hearings later this year.Democrats have been under intense pressure from Republicans accusing them of hiding the proceedings from the public. But the three committees leading the inquiry were encouraged by a federal judge’s ruling on Friday that the inquiry was legally legitimate and that, despite recent precedent, it was not necessary for the full House to vote to authorize it. Nonetheless, stronger resistance may be in the offing as the inquiry edges toward Mr. Trump’s inner circle. Investigators have subpoenaed Charles M. Kupperman, Mr. Trump’s former deputy national security adviser, to testify Monday. After the White House said it would invoke a legal claim of absolute immunity to block Mr. Kupperman’s testimony, Mr. Kupperman filed a lawsuit, asking a federal judge to rule on the matter. Other senior White House officials could follow suit. In a terse letter sent Saturday to Mr. Kupperman’s lawyers, Democrats said the House did not recognize the White House’s legal claims as legitimate. They ordered Mr. Kupperman to testify on Monday or risk adding to evidence that Mr. Trump is obstructing Congress and should be held in contempt.Mr. Trump continued on Saturday to rail against the inquiry, dismissing it on Twitter as “just as Corrupt and Fake as all of the other garbage that went on before it.” He also claimed that Speaker Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader who initiated the impeachment inquiry in September, was neglecting her San Francisco district, which he described as a hellscape of environmental and sanitary violations.Mr. Reeker’s testimony on Saturday was the latest by roughly a dozen witnesses, many of whom were ordered by the administration not to cooperate but confronted with subpoenas complied anyway. Mr. Reeker took charge of the State Department’s activities in Europe and Eurasia this March, dividing his time between Washington and Europe. A 27-year veteran of the foreign service, he had been posted around the world, including in Iraq, Germany, Italy, Hungary and Macedonia. Friends described him as a consummate diplomat, who, as one put it, “never says any word more or any word less than he should.”Mr. Reeker testified that it was immediately clear to him that President Trump had been relying on two other officials to carry out his policy toward Ukraine: Gordon D. Sondland, a Republican fund-raiser who had been named ambassador to the European Union, and Kurt D. Volker, the special envoy to Ukraine. Mr. Sondland was one of seven ambassadors who reported to Mr. Reeker.Mr. Reeker also testified that he understood that Ms. Yovanovitch, the ambassador in Kiev and a longtime colleague, was under attack by Mr. Giuliani and his allies. Among their accusations, the ambassador’s critics claimed that she was disloyal to the president — charges that Mr. Reeker considered completely spurious.In a March 31 email obtained by The New York Times, Mr. Reeker told T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, an adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, that casting Ms. Yovanovitch as a “liberal outpost” was a “fake narrative” that “really is without merit or validation.” Mr. Reeker testified that he pressed both Mr. Brechbuhl and David Hale, the third-ranking State Department official, to release a public statement supporting Ms. Yovanovitch. An administrative aide later informed him that no statement would be issued.Mr. Reeker also supported a subsequent unsuccessful effort by a senior State Department diplomat, Michael McKinley, to issue a public statement in support of Ms. Yovanovitch when details about her ouster became public this fall. Mr. McKinley told congressional investigators this month that he resigned as a senior adviser to Mr. Pompeo partly because the department’s leaders failed to defend Ms. Yovanovitch in the face of false accusations. Although he did not interact directly with Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Reeker testified that he had been aware of his role in pushing out Ms. Yovanovitch, according to one person familiar with his account. But he did not complain directly to Mr. Pompeo, that person said.Mr. Reeker’s testimony followed a gripping account this week from William B. Taylor Jr., who took over as the top American diplomat in Ukraine after Ms. Yovanovitch left. Mr. Taylor testified that Mr. Sondland told him Mr. Trump had refused to release the military aid or meet with the Ukrainian leader until Mr. Zelensky announced that the Biden family was under investigation. Hunter Biden, the son of the former vice president who hopes to challenge Mr. Trump for the White House next year, served on the board of a Ukrainian gas company. Mr. Trump also wanted Ukraine to investigate whether the country had helped Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign in 2016.Advertisement