https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/16/us/mckinley-impeachment-ukraine.html
Former Top State Dept. Aide Tells Impeachment Investigators He Quit Over Ukraine - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
106
AdvertisementSupported byMichael McKinley, who resigned as a senior adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, said career diplomats had been sidelined on Ukraine. By Nicholas Fandos, Julian E. Barnes and Michael D. ShearWASHINGTON — A former top aide to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Congress on Wednesday that he resigned amid mounting frustrations with the Trump administration’s sidelining of career diplomats on Ukraine policy and its failure to support them in the face of the impeachment inquiry.In several hours of closed-door testimony, Michael McKinley, who until last week was a senior adviser to Mr. Pompeo, described his disappointment with how politicized the State Department had become under President Trump, saying that the last straw for him stemmed from the ouster of Marie L. Yovanovitch, the former ambassador to Ukraine whom Mr. Trump ordered removed.According to a copy of his opening remarks reviewed by The New York Times, Mr. McKinley said that after reading in late September that President Trump had disparaged Ms. Yovanovitch as “bad news” on a July phone call with the Ukrainian leader, he had tried to get top State Department officials to publicly laud Ms. Yovanovitch for her “professionalism and courage.” He said he ultimately received no meaningful response, no statement was issued and he decided to step down.“The timing of my resignation was the result of two overriding concerns: the failure, in my view, of the State Department to offer support to Foreign Service employees caught up in the impeachment inquiry on Ukraine,” Mr. McKinley said in an opening statement. “And, second, by what appears to be the utilization of our ambassadors overseas to advance a domestic political objective.”Mr. McKinley told investigators that State Department officials were discouraging people from testifying, and were not supporting diplomats who had received subpoenas and requests to appear before the House, according to a person familiar with his testimony.Echoing concerns raised by Ms. Yovanovitch last week in her own testimony, Mr. McKinley warned that reported efforts by some Trump administration officials to pressure foreign powers like Ukraine “to procure negative information on political opponents” would “have a serious impact on foreign service morale and the integrity of our work overseas.”“I was disturbed by the implication that foreign governments were being approached to procure negative information on political opponents,” he said.Mr. McKinley’s testimony was the latest in a string of accounts that top career diplomats and administration officials have given to impeachment investigators about how experts were sidelined as the president pursued his own agenda on Ukraine, including in a July telephone call in which Mr. Trump asked President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and other Democrats. Taken together, the interviews have corroborated and expanded on many aspects of the intelligence whistle-blower complaint that prompted the impeachment inquiry, which claimed that Mr. Trump abused his power to enlist a foreign government for his own political gain.And House investigators continued to line up crucial witnesses to fill out the deepening saga. William B. Taylor Jr., the top American diplomat in Ukraine, received a House summons to appear on Tuesday, according to an official familiar with the investigation. One associate of Mr. Taylor’s indicated that he was traveling back to the United States this week to prepare for his testimony.Text messages released by investigators this month showed that Mr. Taylor was alarmed by the White House’s decision to freeze $391 million in security assistance to Ukraine, fretting that the administration was withholding the aid as leverage. As more evidence emerged, senators met behind closed doors to discuss their plan for a likely impeachment trial within weeks.Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, arrived at the weekly party luncheon armed with a PowerPoint presentation he showed colleagues outlining the process, which he said he expected could be completed by Christmas, according to two Republicans familiar with the private discussion who described it on the condition of anonymity. Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. would preside, he explained, and the Senate would meet six days a week for the proceeding.During the lunch, Mr. McConnell told members that he believed House Democrats wanted to move expeditiously, possibly approving articles of impeachment by Thanksgiving, and said he also hoped it would go quickly, wrapping up a trial in the Senate by Christmas. “We intend to do our constitutional responsibility,” Mr. McConnell said. While Mr. McKinley told lawmakers that he did not have detailed knowledge about the Ukraine matter, he said the handling of the issue was emblematic of a troublesome trend at the State Department, the people familiar with his testimony said. He spoke of his frustration with Rex W. Tillerson, the former secretary of state, saying he had gutted the department, and praised Mr. Pompeo for his leadership. But Mr. McKinley said he was alarmed at how poorly diplomats were treated. Ms. Yovanovitch, a 30-year veteran of the Foreign Service, testified privately last week that she was abruptly removed from her post after a monthslong push by Mr. Trump to get rid of her on the basis of “unfounded and false claims by people with clearly questionable motives.”He said that when he reached out to Ms. Yovanovitch in late September, she indicated that no senior department officials had contacted her amid revelations of the whistle-blower complaint and Mr. Trump’s July phone call, and that she would welcome more public support, according to his opening remarks.Mr. McKinley also testified that George Kent, a senior State Department official in charge of Ukraine policy, had written a memo documenting an early October meeting with a State Department lawyer about how to respond to the impeachment inquiry that had alarmed him. Mr. McKinley said Mr. Kent shared the memo with him, and he in turn passed it on to other department colleagues with no reply. The document is likely be of intense interest to investigators.Democratic lawmakers who participated in the questioning of Mr. McKinley said he fit the mold of other witnesses the impeachment inquiry had interviewed.“Another career Foreign Service officer with a 33-year career trying to do the right thing,” said Representative Harley Rouda, Democrat of California, as he left the deposition. Mr. Rouda said that Mr. McKinley, like some other witnesses, provided the committees with an opening statement.After leaving the hearing room, Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, said that Mr. McKinley had been both “complimentary of Secretary Pompeo,” and made clear he was “supportive” of Ms. Yovanovitch. Mr. Pompeo has defended the administration’s actions regarding Ukraine, saying that the impeachment inquiry has incited a “silly gotcha game” in Washington.Mr. McKinley appeared voluntarily before the committee, which did not issue a subpoena to compel his testimony, according to an official involved in the inquiry.He arrived on Capitol Hill Wednesday as the House’s impeachment inquiry has accelerated, with daily hourslong depositions that Democratic lawmakers hope will expose the activities of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s personal lawyer, to pressure Ukraine’s government to dig up damaging information about Mr. Trump’s political rivals.The steady stream of diplomats and White House officials have appeared before the committees despite Mr. Trump’s vow not to cooperate with the inquiry. Mr. McKinley’s testimony further sets the stage for the expected deposition on Thursday of Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union and a Trump loyalist.In the past week, witnesses have described a shadow foreign policy led by Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Sondland and Rick Perry, the secretary of energy, which was meant to sideline the diplomats with formal responsibility over relations with Ukraine.Reporting was contributed by Sharon LaFraniere, Emily Cochrane, Catie Edmondson and Julian Barnes.Advertisement