https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/30/us/politics/democrats-impeachment-vote.html
Democrats, Once Wary of Partisan Impeachment Inquiry Vote, Unite as Politics Shift - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
142
AdvertisementSupported byMembers who have long resisted a formal floor vote are now solidly behind the idea. The change reflects Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s close hold over her caucus.By Sheryl Gay StolbergWASHINGTON — When Speaker Nancy Pelosi polled Democrats privately about taking a formal floor vote on the impeachment inquiry into President Trump earlier this month, the idea was scuttled by nervous moderates who feared a backlash from voters in their Trump-friendly districts.But when Ms. Pelosi convened her rank and file behind closed doors on Wednesday morning to lay out plans for a similar vote, now scheduled for Thursday, she met with little dissent.Representative Colin Allred, a Texas freshman who flipped a Republican seat, said before the meeting that a vote was fine with him. Representative Max Rose of New York, once a vocal opponent of impeachment, said he would back the resolution, which would authorize the House Intelligence Committee to conduct public hearings and produce a report to guide the Judiciary Committee as it considers drafting impeachment articles.Ditto for Representative Elissa Slotkin, a freshman from Michigan who resisted an impeachment inquiry for months: “I’ve said from the beginning that anything that makes this process as fair and as transparent as possible is good for me and good for the voters.” The striking turnabout reflects Democrats’ growing confidence that the public is behind their fact-finding mission into Mr. Trump’s dealing with Ukraine. It comes after weeks of bombshell revelations confirmed an anonymous whistle-blower’s assertion that Mr. Trump withheld military aid from Ukraine as part of a pressure campaign to enlist the country to smear his political rivals.The shift also reflects Ms. Pelosi’s close hold on and keen instincts about her fractious caucus, and the rapidly evolving politics of impeachment, captured in internal polls and focus groups. The result is that Democrats appear ready to call the bluff of the White House and Republicans, who have clamored for a vote to authorize the impeachment process but are now staunchly opposed to the Democrats’ resolution laying out rules to govern it.The vote is expected to be deeply partisan. The resolution scheduled for Thursday would not authorize the inquiry, a step that is not required under the Constitution or House rules and that Democrats have consistently said is not needed. Still, it will be the first time since Democrats began their inquiry into the Ukraine matter last month that the entire chamber will be asked to go on the record about the process, and is all but certain to be treated as a vote of approval or disapproval. The measure would also provide a mechanism for Republicans to request subpoenas for witnesses and documents — a point that Ms. Pelosi emphasized on Wednesday during the closed-door session. Striking a sober tone, she also asked Representative Emanuel Cleaver II of Missouri, who is a Methodist pastor, to deliver a prayer.“Nobody came here to impeach a president, and no decision has been made to impeach the president,” she told members, according to an aide in the room who described her comments on the condition of anonymity because they were private. But, she added, a decision had been made to open the impeachment inquiry, “and now, we are putting forth the terms as to how we go forth in the fairest possible way.”Republicans, though, insist the process is rigged against them, and object in particular to a provision in the resolution that gives the Intelligence Committee chairman, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the power to reject their subpoena requests. “It affords us the same opportunities we have now, which is to beg Chairman Schiff for due process,” said Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina and a close ally of Mr. Trump.Thursday’s vote comes as Democrats are marching ahead with closed-door questioning of witnesses like Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, a White House expert on Ukraine whose testimony rocked the Capitol on Tuesday. Colonel Vindman told investigators that he “did not think it was proper” for Mr. Trump to have asked that country’s leader to investigate former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., and that a White House transcript of a call between the two leaders, which he listened to, omitted key words and phrases.“I think this vindicates the speaker’s strategy,” said Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California and an ally of Ms. Pelosi. “She has counseled a methodical, deliberative approach. She wanted to build the evidence, and she’s now gotten us in a place where we have almost the entire caucus behind us.”“Had she jumped the gun as others were pressuring her to do,” Mr. Khanna added, “we wouldn’t have had this kind of unanimity.”Still, there is a risk: If only Democrats vote in favor of the resolution, while some join Republicans in voting against it — which appears likely — the partisan vote could buttress Republican arguments that the inquiry is a purely political exercise aimed solely at overturning the 2016 election. At least one Democrat, Representative Jeff Van Drew of New Jersey, who is among the small group of lawmakers in his party still opposing the impeachment inquiry, intends to vote against the resolution.Mr. Van Drew said he saw no redeeming value in moving forward, particularly with Mr. Trump likely to be acquitted by the Republican-controlled Senate. He sees the impeachment effort as undermining other important business.“We spent a lot of time, a lot of money, a lot of energy, unable to get an awful lot of things done that I think I would have loved to see because of it,” Mr. Van Drew said.Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the No. 2 House Republican, said he did not expect any Republican defections. “The members we’ve talked to recognize that the process is tainted,” he said.Impeachment votes have long been divisive. In February 1974, the House voted overwhelmingly, 410 to 4, to authorize the Judiciary Committee to investigate whether there were “sufficient grounds to impeach” President Richard M. Nixon. But in October 1998, the House voted 258 to 176 to open the impeachment inquiry into President Bill Clinton, with only 31 Democrats joining Republicans. Many fewer Republicans are expected to break ranks with Mr. Trump and vote for the resolution on Thursday. Polls show that the public is sharply divided over impeachment along party lines. Nearly 84 percent of Democrats but just 11 percent of Republicans favor impeaching Mr. Trump, according to the website FiveThirtyEight, which tracks impeachment polling. Among independents, a crucial constituency, 46 percent favor impeachment.But Democrats are buoyed by internal polling conducted by their campaign arm, which found that their candidates lead Republican candidates by three percentage points in House battleground districts, and by eight points in all districts, according to a Democratic aide who spoke anonymously to share details of the private survey.Nicholas Fandos and Catie Edmondson contributed reporting.Advertisement