https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/21/world/australia/isis-camp-syria.html
Desperate Pleas to Free Women and Children From ISIS Camps in Syria - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
51
AdvertisementSupported byBy Livia Albeck-RipkaCANBERRA, Australia — When Kamalle Dabboussy learned this month that President Trump was removing troops from northeastern Syria, he pulled over in his car and wept.For months, Mr. Dabboussy has been lobbying the Australian government to remove his daughter and three grandchildren from a detention camp for relatives of Islamic State fighters. Now, he believes, the window to save them is closing.“It’s tough; it’s scary,” he told his daughter, Mariam, during a recent phone call. Mr. Dabboussy tried to comfort her. “We’re still pushing,” he said.The fate of tens of thousands of women and children in Kurdish-run detainee camps in Syria has posed a challenge for governments around the world since the Islamic State lost its last territory there earlier this year. But the chaos and violence that have followed the American pullback have intensified questions about what duty nations have to citizens detained abroad, even those affiliated with a brutal terrorist group.transcriptKamalle, have you gotten in touch with Mariam in, like, the last 24 hours or so? Or have you heard from her recently?I got a message from her. I got a message from Mariam. I wasn’t able to speak to her.Can you read the message to us?I’m — it’s actually, it’s two messages. If Australia doesn’t save, I think, the Aussies here right now, we’re slaves, and we’re screwed. And I think I’m going to die. That’s the two messages received overnight from her.That can’t be an easy text to receive as a father.No, it’s not.Yeah, I — it’s the fear of the unknown, and the fear of not knowing. But they are more petrified of the Syrians taking over than of anything else. And that’s their worst-case scenario. And that’s — ISIS cells and Syrian regime are the two biggest threats. And they seem to be becoming realized as the days progress.And do you think that Mariam’s fears are —Justified? Yeah, absolutely, I think her fears are justified. Absolutely, they are. If the Syrians come in, absolutely, they are.Over the past few months, I’ve been getting to know a group of families in Australia, who’ve been organizing, providing solace to one another, because they are members of this strange club of people whose daughters and mothers and sisters are the family members of ISIS fighters. The person who I’ve gotten to know the best is Kamalle Dabboussy.I wanted to be an engaged father.Wanted her to grow up with people around her that loved her and that she could find solace with, that she could find friendships with. That’s really the expectations that I’d had. I, you know, never had the expectations that Mariam was going to be a future doctor, or chemist, or engineer. That wasn’t in my thoughts. It was really just making her a happy, well-rounded child and hopeful that she can achieve whatever she wanted to achieve. And I tried.In the months since the United States defeated ISIS in Syria, ISIS militants and their family members have been held in prison camps controlled by the U.S.-allied Kurdish forces. And in that time, parents around the world have been trying to get their daughters and grandchildren back to their home countries. But in the two weeks since President Trump abruptly recalled U.S. troops from the Syrian border, the fate of these women and children has become an urgent and unknown question. The Kurdish forces that had been guarding the camps have turned to defending themselves from the Turkish military coming across the border. And their new allies in Syria are now poised to take control of the camps. Today on “The Daily,” my colleague Livia Albeck-Ripka follows one father as he fights to get his daughter home.It’s Monday, October 21.Livia, tell me about Mariam.Mariam was Kamalle’s first child. She was born in 1991. He describes her as this really —She was a stubborn little thing. [CHUCKLES]— stubborn, lively toddler. And she kind of ran rings around her parents.She had a great wonder for the world. She always wanted to go about exploring. She always wanted to go out and visit. She always wanted to go out and see. Even just down to the local shop to get something was an adventure for her. And she’d walk out. And she’d be the first — and she’d be dressed right away to go. And she’d love to go out and see whatever she could see with the world. And she was determined. And that was lovely. You didn’t want a child to sit in a corner and just say, yes, sir, no, sir. You want her to go and explore, and test the boundaries, and figure out the world. And she was all that and more. She took up every space in our life, if I could put it that way.She’s really boisterous, strong-willed. And from pretty early on, she starts to express to Kamalle that she really wants a little brother or sister. It’s kind of like from the very beginning, she knows that she wants to have a big family. So Kamalle and his wife have a little girl, Mariam’s sister. They kind of adored each other. They just had this wonderful sibling relationship.So this very much sounds like the kind of childhood that Kamalle was hoping for Mariam.It was, but it didn’t last. Kamalle’s marriage wasn’t working out. Eventually, the two separate, and they split up the girls. Mariam is about 12, 13 at this time. She’s really upset about the split. But a decision is made. She’s going to go and live with Kamalle. And at first, it’s tough.Then when she passed a certain age, and she started to understand things a bit better, we became very close. And —They have Sunday morning pancakes together. And they become closer and closer. They kind of, they tell each other everything.And we became — she became, you know, a very close friend, not only my daughter but a close friend.I’ve heard you call her your best friend.Yes. She was my best friend growing up. She had — by virtue of the fact that we were in the same house, she had my secrets. And I had her secrets. And she knew that. And —One day, Mariam meets a boy. His name is Khaled. And she’s only 16. So it takes a little while for Kamalle to get to know this guy. But he likes him. He says —I did. I very much liked him. He was sweet. He was gentle. He was a little bit undisciplined in what he was doing in life. He actually reminded — he reminded me of myself a fair bit.Mm.I quite liked him. He was very, you know, he was — he seemed to have the temperament for her as well. She was —Khaled also has this really big, stable family that it’s clear Mariam is drawn to.His family had been a bit more traditional and conservative than I was.But they’re a little more strict and conservative than Kamalle’s practice of Islam, which is more philosophical, more based on his interpretation of what he thinks the laws mean, rather than ritualistically practicing them. But he says these people are really good people. He likes them. So eventually, Mariam comes to Kamalle. And she is barely 18. She tells him she wants to marry Khaled.I didn’t have an objection to him. I had an objection to their age.Kamalle says, no way. She kind of accepts it. And she asks him again and again and again. And finally, Kamalle relinquishes. He says, O.K. Who am I to stand in the way of this?She wanted a family. And she wanted children. And that’s really what her want was. So I just made sure that that was her choice, not that she was being bullied into it, basically. That’s what it was, really making sure with her, and that was her choice. And, yeah, that was the next phase of her life. And I was very happy for her.I had hoped that she had remained close to me. But circumstances were that she wasn’t going to stay close to me that long after that.After Mariam marries Khaled, she moves in with him to a little granny flat at the back of his parents’ home. They eventually have a baby. And Kamalle starts noticing Mariam changing. It’s nothing extreme at first. It just seems to him that they’re adopting the views of Khaled’s family, becoming a little more conservative, praying more often. But it’s when Mariam puts on the scarf —Which, in itself, is not — it’s not a bad thing. It’s just she’d decided to wear the scarf, where up until that stage, no one in our family wears a scarf. So it was a change.— that he has questions.And I, you know, I didn’t take the first answer she gave to me. I pushed and pushed till a point that I was satisfied.What was that first answer?She just said, I did it myself. No one’s told me to do this. And I just, again, prodded and prodded, and tried to make her see that sometimes, the — you could be — there could be a suggestion made. And you’ve not realized that you’re pushed into that corner. And she felt, no, that she was quite — she felt that she was making the decision herself.And eventually, he accepts it, because he believes it’s her choice. Then they all go on this extended family trip. It’s really fun and exciting. Khaled’s never been overseas before. He and Mariam have this new baby girl. And they go to Malaysia. And then they go to Dubai. And —He was fun-loving. He was out and about. We went exploring. We did a safari tour together.It’s all really good. But Kamalle does notice Khaled drawing a little bit away from him. And he tries to talk to him. He says that Khaled, who he calls K., was doing all these extra prayers. Kamalle kind of questions it. But K. won’t engage with him. There’s this block.And so I thought to myself, O.K., I need to do a bit more work on this one, gently, rather than trying to — you know, two ways to break a stone — you know, get a sledgehammer and break it, or a drop of water slowly to break it open. I wanted to take the drop of water approach, let it break it up, and see if I can get some conversations and start challenging some of those thoughts.So Kamalle has to get back to Australia for work. He leaves his daughter and his son-in-law in Dubai. And they go on to Lebanon. And they’re supposed to go on from there to Greece and then come home to Australia. But while they’re in Lebanon, Khaled suggests a trip to Turkey. Kamalle doesn’t really read too much into this. Turkey is a beautiful country, a beautiful place to visit. But then communications started to dissipate. And then it kind of goes quiet for a couple of weeks.And then, there’s a knock on his door. It was the police. They told him, your daughter is in Syria.Oh, I was in disbelief. I said, no, that couldn’t be the case. I — it was just disbelief. I just didn’t believe it to be true.Kamalle really starts to worry. He starts trying to call his contacts. He starts trying to find Mariam, and he can’t.And a month goes by before he does. Some text messages, some phone calls start to come in from Mariam. She says, I’m safe. She doesn’t tell her father where she is. And she says, don’t do anything stupid.I really refused for it to be true until Mariam had said to me, saying that, Dad, I thought you might have realized what had happened to me. And I don’t want you to do anything risky to yourself. Just stay put, basically, is what she said to me. And so that was actually the real moment that I knew that’s where she was.She was with ISIS.We’ll be right back.Livia, this would have been 2015, so the year after ISIS declared the caliphate and started to call on Muslims around the world to join them there. In these early days, what’s Kamalle’s understanding of Mariam’s role in ISIS? Did he think that she might be a combatant? Did he think she was kind of a passive supporter, who was suddenly in the midst of these true believers? I mean, what was his sense of this?He didn’t know. He was sort of surviving on this drip feed of information that was coming to him via sporadic texts and calls. Sometimes he didn’t even know if the text messages were from Mariam herself. Or she would be on a call. And she’d say, Dad, don’t talk. I’ll talk. And it was clear to him that somebody was watching her and controlling her. And so he really — he doesn’t know. But he does have doubts.There was a small period of time, of course, you doubt the situation. You doubt everything that you know. And you re-evaluate everything that you know. And like most people, I suppose you’ve got different options in your head and different scenarios in your head. And you’re trying to figure out what’s right and what’s not right.Did it seem like something Mariam would be capable of doing?No, it wasn’t something that Mariam was capable of doing. But to say I never thought that could be a possibility? I thought about it. There was a period of time I thought, maybe she chose to go.How would that have made you feel as a father?Very disappointed. Very, very disappointed. Quite shocked, actually, knowing everything we’ve done together, and everything we’ve grown up together, and everything that she knew that I believed in, and what I thought she believed in, I would’ve been really shocked. I — yeah.Once they had made initial contact, Kamalle and Mariam kept talking as much as they could, given the censorship, all of the monitored communication. And it’s some time after this that Kamalle learns that Khaled has been killed. And here and there, Mariam starts to suggest that she no longer wants to be there. Kamalle said she would sneak away without any guards and text Kamalle a few words. During one of these private moments, she told him, I was forced. And finally, she tells Kamalle, she’s going to make a break for it.My mind — because in some of the discussions that we had backwards and forwards by text, which led me to believe that she’d intimated that she needed to move, which was sort of — I got from her an idea that she needed to move out of where she was.After that, Kamalle didn’t hear from her for 19 months, not a word.And it was absolutely an awful time in my life. I didn’t know whether she was alive or dead. I didn’t know whether she had made it safe. I didn’t know the condition of the kids. I, you know, went into a depression. I sought medical help. I sought professional help as the days and the months passed.And I had started to think towards the end of that period of time that she may have succumbed, that actually she may never be coming home.And then —One day he goes into his bedroom. And he looks at his phone.And I’m looking at my phone. And there were these several messages. Baba, it’s me. You know, Dad, it’s me. Dad, it’s me. Call me. Call me. And I called the phone, and it was her voice. And literally, I collapsed, just to know that she was alive, and she was O.K. And that she could tell me what had happened to her. She told me that there’s another child.And what happened next?Well, then she said to me, Dad, if it was difficult before with two kids, it’s now even more difficult with three kids. I’m not going to try and make a break for it until there’s absolute safety, and things are going to happen. So she just —He says she tells him it’s too dangerous to try again. But by 2018, ISIS is under siege. And in the months that have passed, they’re down to virtually no territory at all. And the bombing is intensifying. Mariam says her second husband is also killed. And then she’s forced into a third marriage.But that third marriage wasn’t as dramatic as the second marriage, if I could put it that way. I think he wasn’t a fighter, by the accounts. He was working in the hospital. I was told that he was actually a bit more supportive with her.Some time after her third husband is captured, Kamalle gets advice that Mariam should surrender to Kurdish forces, who have been key allies to the U.S. in this fight against ISIS, and who hold territory in northeastern Syria. And then in early 2019, she contacts her father. And she lets him know she’s ended up in the Al Hol camp, where the families of ISIS fighters are being held, which is where she meets the other Australian women. They begin to forge friendships with one another. They kind of connect their tents up to protect themselves from the more radicalized women, who have been known to beat and even mutilate other women in the camp who they perceive to be nonbelievers. And then Mariam thinks to herself, hey, we should get our parents to talk to one another. And so she texts her dad and says, you and the other family members need to talk to one another. You need to get us out of here.So Kamalle starts making contact with the family members of these women. And this strange club starts to form. For so long — for years, in most cases — these families have been keeping a secret that their sisters, their daughters are in Syria. And suddenly, they have a forum where they can connect with one another, and talk about how hard it’s been, and also begin to organize and discuss how they might get them out. They’re having meetings. They’re writing letters to politicians. They’re stressing to government that if they’re to get these women and children out, now is the time to do it. The Kurds are running the camp. Things are relatively stable. But the families sense that this isn’t going to last for that long. And it’s at this time that Kamalle is also planning a trip to Syria. He thinks, well, even if he can’t get his daughter out, he wants to see her. And it’s also an opportunity to make contact with the Kurds and the Americans to try to figure out the logistics of what it might look like to get her and the other women and children out. So earlier this year, he goes. He visits her in the Al-Hol camp.Well, whatever you heard about the camp scene, it was different. This was summer. It was 50-degree heat that we were facing.It is 50 degrees Celsius, or more than 120 degrees Fahrenheit.And you looked out. And there was not a green thing in sight, not a tree, not grass. All it was was rocks. And there were these tents sitting on top of these rocks. And it really felt like a moonscape, a dusty moonscape. And it was just so hot that just getting some water to the camp was difficult. Going to get water and bringing it back was difficult.So describe to me this first moment that you see Mariam. How does she look? How does she react to you?So we could see the car pull up. We could see them getting out of the car. We could see them running towards us. And Mariam was carrying the youngest one in her hands. And she just hugged me. And she was excited to — you know, was very excited, breathing very heavy. And I kept telling her, just breathe. Just relax. I’m here. But, you know, she just kept saying, I can’t believe you’re here. I can’t believe that you’re here. I can’t believe you made it. I can’t believe you made it. And she just turned around and said, I’m broken. I need my dad. I need my dad.So tell me about the moment that she actually lifted the niqab off her face and you saw her.[SNIFFLING] Well, she — she’d lifted — I — I’d said to her, let me see you. Let me see you. And then she’d lift the niqab off her face, just privately. And I was shocked with how much weight she’d lost. I was shocked with how pale her skin was. But, no, I couldn’t show any of that, of course.And I just saw her. And then she’d put her niqaab back down. She wouldn’t leave it up for very long.And then I asked her about the story. And then I, you know, because this had been such a big issue to me for so long. I said, tell me, what happened? How did you get here?Mariam then takes Kamalle to see the camp. But after only a few hours, he has to leave. They hug each other goodbye. Kamalle is trying to stay strong for his daughter and is grappling with the fact that he’s physically there with her, and he can’t take her with him. The Australian government hasn’t made up its mind what to do with Mariam and the other women and children. So he goes home, alone.So after that visit, Kamalle returns to Sydney. He’s driving from Sydney to Melbourne. It’s about a 10-hour drive. And he’s going to Melbourne to meet with some family members of the women and children. He’s on the road, and he gets a call. It’s a journalist who tells him, did you see Trump’s tweet? The U.S. has just given Turkey permission to cross the border. It dawns on Kamalle in this moment that everything they had been pressing the government for for months, their worst fears, could come true, that a Turkish incursion would sow instability in the region, which could ultimately cost the lives of his daughter and his grandchildren. And he knows this window to get them out is suddenly growing very, very short. So he pulls over on the side of the road, and he weeps.It’s shifting hour by hour. The Syrian forces coming into that space, I don’t know what it means for everyone. I really don’t know what it means for everyone.So I’m going to try — sorry, even though it’s 3 o’clock in the morning there, try and ring through —To Mariam? Would you mind putting it on speaker?Hello? Hello?O.K.O.K., sorry. It’s just not letting me get through. Some — yeah.Tomorrow, Part 2 of Kamalle’s story.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.Order.Order.The ayes to the right, 322. The nos to the left, 306. [CHEERS]Parliament has rejected an agreement between Prime Minister Boris Johnson and the European Union for Britain to leave the E.U. by the end of October, likely requiring yet another delay in the Brexit process, possibly until January. Despite skepticism of the agreement, Johnson had hoped that enough lawmakers fed up with previous delays would approve it over the weekend.[YELLING]As Parliament voted, an estimated 1 million people demonstrated against Brexit on the streets of downtown London, arguing for a new referendum to keep Britain in the E.U.Brexit!When do we want it?Never!What do we want?Brexit!When do we want it?Never!And President Trump has reversed course on his decision to hold the next G7 summit of world leaders at his own resort in Florida, which both Democrats and Republicans had called an illegal act of self-dealing by the president.He was honestly surprised at the level of pushback. At the end of the day, you know, he still considers himself to be in the hospitality business. And he saw an opportunity to take the biggest leaders from around the world. And he wanted to put on the absolute best show, the best visit that he possibly could. And he was very —In a tweet over the weekend, Trump cited the criticism, and said he would immediately begin searching for an alternate location.I think it’s the right decision to change. We’ll have to find someplace else. And my guess is we’ll find someplace else that the media won’t like, either, for another reason.I just have to pick up —That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Mr. Dabboussy has been leading a contingent of about a dozen Australian families seeking the return of more than 65 relatives, most of them children. He has traveled to Al-Hol, the camp where his daughter is being held in what he describes as unbearable conditions. He has spent months writing letters, calling politicians and uniting families who had kept the dark secret of their missing loved ones.The women and children at Al-Hol, from about 50 countries, have been largely shunned by their home governments. In Australia, top leaders have cited a long list of reasons they cannot be repatriated, including security concerns.Even if a cease-fire announced late last week holds, the Australian government has said, it is still far too risky to consider extracting the detainees. Officials said they would not put other lives in danger to save the women and children.“Parents, mothers and fathers, have made a decision to take children into a theater of war,” the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, told reporters in Canberra, the capital, on Friday. “We’ve been very clear we’re not going to put Australian defense, foreign affairs or home affairs personnel or other agency staff at risk.” He added, “They’ve been fighting in the name of an evil organization, and there are consequences.”The Australian government has maintained that at least some of the women joined the Islamic State willingly, and could pose a threat to national security. In some cases, it has even canceled the citizenship of fighters and family members it has deemed to be radicalized.While many women from around the world  joined the terrorist group of their own accord, the families of all the Australian women in Al-Hol say they were coerced by husbands and other family members. Many say they are related by blood or marriage to Muhammad Zahab, a Sydney teacher turned Islamic State fighter, who they say delivered them to Syria.Mr. Dabboussy says that his 28-year-old daughter, while on a vacation in Turkey, was tricked by her husband into going to the border with Syria. She was then forced to cross at gunpoint.He and other family members of those inside Al-Hol have become increasingly desperate to free them as fears have grown that Syrian government forces could displace the Kurds and take over the camp.“That is a horrendous thought,” Mr. Dabboussy said. “Death might be the more merciful option.”Conditions inside the camp were already miserable, with hundreds of children dying from disease and malnutrition, according to the United Nations Human Rights Council. Some women deemed apostates by more radicalized women have reported beatings and mutilation.The Australian families argue that there are legal mechanisms to deal with the women, if necessary, after they return home. “We understand the rule of law,” Mr. Dabboussy said.Lawyers representing the women argue that Australia has a constitutional duty to repatriate citizens and apply due process. These legal obligations include a duty to investigate crimes of an international nature, and to protect Australian citizens who are detained overseas, said Sarah Condon, one of the lawyers, who is based in Melbourne.Policy experts also say that in some cases in which mothers are deemed to be radicalized, the state has a duty to take their children into its custody. Others argue that the government has a moral obligation to extract children who had no say in their parents’ journey to Islamic State territory.Some who study terrorism warn of the risks of leaving the women to potentially escape the camp amid the disarray. That, they argue, could help lead to a resurgence of the Islamic State.“There are certainly threats and risks when you repatriate people, but there’s also risks to not addressing this issue,” said Lydia Khalil, a research fellow at the Lowy Institute in Sydney who specializes in the Middle East and international terrorism. She said the camp and other detention sites were “already hotbeds of further radicalization.”United Nations Security Council resolutions mandate that countries take action to have their citizens who joined the Islamic State brought before the law.But while “every government calls for other countries to repatriate their citizens,” said David Malet, a political scientist at American University in Washington, “most do what they can to avoid repatriating their own.”Both President Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have urged other countries to take back their citizens. As of July, a handful had been repatriated to the United States, according to a report by the Rojava Information Center, a group that does research on the Kurdish areas of Syria.Some countries with sizable Muslim populations have repatriated large numbers of detainees, and European countries have reportedly been looking at using the cease-fire to return women and children.But Australia has brought home fewer than 10 children since the camp opened, mostly orphans.While Mr. Dutton, the conservative home affairs minister, has maintained that returning those in the camp “would be very dangerous,” his counterpart in the opposition Labor Party, Kristina Keneally, has said that information from the authorities indicates that some of the women are genuine victims.Ms. Keneally said that “the government has a full tool kit” to be able to “detain and prosecute and control people who would seek to do us harm.” She noted a bill passed in July that enables the government both to delay the return of foreign fighters and their families, and to impose conditions on them once they have done so.Mr. Dabboussy said Kurdish contacts had assured him that safe routes to remove the women and children remained open.All last week, messages and calls from Al-Hol streamed to Mr. Dabboussy’s phone.“This is not what we deserve,” one woman said in a voice message sent from the camp. She added: “We’re scared, we need help, we really need urgent help. Please help us.”transcriptAll of a sudden, U.S. troops left their observation posts along the Syrian border after the White House said it wouldn’t stand in the way of a Turkish invasion.Turkey has confirmed that its ground forces are on the move after launching an aerial attack overnight. It comes after the abrupt U.S. pullout from the area. The Kurdish —Turkey has released a video of its fighter jets bombing Kurdish positions as the nation presses ahead with its invasion. There’s been continual —The best time to get these 66 women and children out of the Al Hol camp was before the Turkish invasion. The government had little appetite, I must say, to get these people out of Syria before the invasion. And I don’t detect a great appetite now. And it’s certainly now a lot more complicated. Now, their future looks really, really uncertain. And if they do get out, perhaps to Kurdish —Yesterday on “The Daily,” we met Kamalle Dabboussy, who for months has been lobbying the Australian government to bring back his daughter and grandchildren, who were being held at a detention center in Syria for the relatives of ISIS fighters. When we left off, Kamalle had just received a call from a journalist that President Trump had just announced he would withdraw U.S. troops from the Syrian border. And it was expected that the Kurdish forces who had been guarding the prisons as allies of the U.S. would abandon their posts, leaving the prisoners’ lives in imminent danger. Today: My colleague Livia Albeck-Ripka follows Kamalle’s journey to convince the Australian government that that danger is greater than the one posed by bringing his daughter home.It’s Tuesday, October 22.So Kamalle has a little cry in the car. He gathers his thoughts. And then he pretty much immediately springs into action. About 25 minutes later, he calls this journalist back. He gives them a quote. Another 20 minutes pass — another call from the media. Then other people start doing interviews.We don’t want people coming back, having the skills in bomb-making and terrorist activity, to commit an atrocity in our country.Conservatives in the country start talking, saying —Australians don’t want them back in the country. They don’t trust them. They don’t believe them.— no way. We cannot bring these women and children back.It’s too dangerous for us to send people in there to get them out. That option went. As soon as the U.S. president said, we’re removing the troops, that option was off the table.You want to go out there and have this hatred towards Western society and this ideology — we’re not going to just turn around and say, oh, come on back down to Australia. We’re going to look after you. Sorry — no, I won’t.So Kamalle does another interview in response to that.Please save our children. That’s the plea from a spokesman for the 65 Australians detained in the Al Hol camp in northeastern Syria.Then he does a presser.These are Australian lives. We’re talking about 44 children. We’re talking about 46 children, by some accounts.It’s just one interview after the other —Please, make them safe.— after the other.Make them safe. If you have to assist them anywhere, assist them anywhere around the globe, but you need to make them safe.Kamalle Dabboussy, thank you very much for talking to AM this morning.Thank you.And it’s from here that he makes a plan to drive to Canberra.At this point, the government still hasn’t really acknowledged him or the other families. And so he decides he’s going to physically take himself there and meet with as many politicians as he can to lobby — to make a final push in what he believes is this closing window to get his daughter home.Hello?Hi, Kamalle!How are you?Sorry, I’m a little late.That’s O.K. You made it.How are you going? I did make it. I think there was a marathon on. And my Uber driver —So I meet Kamalle at his cousin’s house in Melbourne.All right — have good travel —O.K.— safe travels.Thanks very much.All the best. Nice to meet you.Thanks very much. Nice to meet you too.Take care and —Then we get on the road. And we’ve got this —Thank you.— six and a half, seven-hour drive ahead of us.Make yourself comfortable. I should have warned you. One thing about traveling with me — you have to put up with my music, whatever it is.Oh!I’m sorry.What’s your —Well, it’s very —— sort of late-‘70s —Nice!— ‘80s, not much on the ‘90s.I’m going to actually — where — oh here we go.So the ‘70s are your era?Well — ‘80’s, late-‘70s —Oh, ‘80s —and ‘80s.Do you like Bowie?Oh, yeah.So in a lot of ways, it feels like a normal road trip.[INAUDIBLE].[SPEAKING ARABIC].[SPEAKING ARABIC].[SPEAKING ARABIC].[SPEAKING ARABIC]. Sorry, habibi, I didn’t have time to —But a lot of the time, he’s fielding calls from the other families who are worried about the women and children —Did it? I’ve tried to speak to confirm. I’ve not been able to get through at all. Did you get a message? Did you?Yes — yeah, I got a message [SPEAKING ARABIC].— from the attorney for the families, who wants to discuss their strategy.Are you able to pull over just for five minutes?Yeah, sure. Just give me a second.And more calls from the media.I’m just trying to sort of find a —He’s also hearing from the young women themselves.(CRYING) How are you? I’m so scared. Oh my God, I don’t know how much longer I can do this for.They’re messaging him, frantic for information.It’s O.K. [ARABIC]The news is developing fast. And there are all kinds of reports flying around. Most of it sounds very bad.Hello?There are rumors that food and water will be cut off from the camps, that ISIS fighters could escape and attack the women.We’re just laying in our tent. I’m going to send you a photo. All the kids are laying down — made them lay down so the bullets don’t reach them.So the women are naturally terrified. Kamalle is receiving these texts —They killed a few women. And they also injured a few women today.— we’re going to die. We don’t deserve this. We need a second chance.Please, let somebody know.And the women in the camps are also texting and trying to get through to their families, who then call Kamalle for clarification.She said there’s another way. I’ll send it to you now, the message. [SPEAKING ARABIC] She said there’s another way —So the whole thing is like this game of broken telephone, and Kamalle is like the operator —Yeah, this was issued more for the Melbourne families than the Sydney families.O.K.So not to worry too much for the Sydney families, but I will let you know.— assuaging people —O.K. Also, have we heard anything from the government in this regard? Or are we going to wait for the meeting to affirm?We have to wait and see. But we are in there. And we are fighting. We’ve gotten national coverage now on this.Yeah.Yeah, I think we’ve done enough. I don’t think, in the short-term, there’s anything more that we can do. I think it’s just holding our breath really for this week.Yes. Yes. Painful. O.K., then.But the one person who he wants to reach most, his own daughter Mariam —— isn’t answering.O.K., I’ll try again in an hour’s time with Mariam.Finally —— make this whole process —Are you calling Mariam?Hello? What [YELLING] —— somebody picks up the phone.[YELLING] Hello?You can hear a woman’s voice kind of yelling. And then the call cuts out.Kamalle maintains his calm.The thing about Victorian roads — they’re relatively straight.Mm.I know, there’s some — but they’re relatively straight.We have normal conversations. He’s singing along to the music.(SINGING) — the boy said, my name’s Johnny. And it might be a sin, but I’ll take your bet, and you’re gonna regret, because I’m the best that’s ever been.And as we get closer to Canberra, he says —Does it feel like a pivotal moment?I don’t want to let myself feel that. I don’t want to build the expectations.Yeah.He’s trying to manage the expectations about what he’ll be able to achieve with these lawmakers.— the attention of politicians or media —But he’s also allowing himself to imagine this future in which Mariam is home.— in a way?I’m immensely looking forward to having her back.I think that I need to check myself. Because the girl that got married and the girl that left is different than the girl that’s coming back. And I need to remind myself of that. And I don’t know what to expect when she gets back, really, and as far as the details go.And I think — I’ve seen it too many times that people expect that old relationship to return or that old person to return. That may be an expectation I don’t want to place on the relationship. It’s going to be a remapping. And it’s going to be a new relationship. And it’s going to be a new woman. It has to. There’s going to be a lot of healing that has to happen. And that has to happen without the expectation of what I think the relationship looks like. I don’t know if that makes sense.Yeah, absolutely.She just needs to heal. And then I need to map the relationship with her. And it’s got to be one that’s two adults back in the relationship. It’s — it’s just terribly complex what’s going to happen next.So after seven hours on the road, we make it. We get to Canberra.O.K., let’s get ourselves fixed up.We check into our hotel.O.K.I’ll see you in the morning.Good night, Kamalle.O.K., good night. Thanks.You get some rest.We say our good nights and get to bed.But at some point in the night, after we go to sleep, there’s this news. The Kurds have struck a deal with Syria, with the Assad regime. And the women fear the worst, that its troops could take over the camp, raping them, turning them into slaves, or worse.Hi, this is an Australian in the camps. We just got news that the Kurds have allied with — have allied with the regime.And in the hours that followed, the women are sending Kamalle frantic voice memos from the camp.(CRYING) One of the — one of their deals with the — one of their deals is to give us women ISIS prisoners and women and children from the camps to Bashar and to transfer us to Damascus. This is not — this is not what we deserve. We’re scared. We need help. We really need urgent help. The majority of these kids are little babies. We don’t want them to be raised in regime prisons. At least our kids, at least their children — they don’t deserve to see this. They don’t deserve to see this. Please, please, please! Before it’s too late. Within the next few days, it’s going to happen. Please. Please, help us. I know nobody can really come here and help us. But somebody needs to say something. Somebody needs to do something. I don’t want to be forgotten. I don’t want to be ignored from the world. I don’t want my kids to be ignored from the world. Please, please, please, please, just save us from here.The Kurds did a deal with the Syrian government to fend off a Turkish offensive. They say they had to choose between compromise and genocide. For the first time in seven years —The next day, we wake up to the news that the Kurds have formed a deal with Syria.200,000 people have fled their homes, heading to —Which, for Kamalle, is a horrendous thought. He thinks that if the Syrians take over the camps, the women are as good as dead. In fact, he says, death would be the more merciful option.So when Kamalle shows up in Parliament that day, he is on a mission.We’re just walking through the press gallery in Canberra, in Parliament. You can see all the different national media outlets — Channel 10, ABC, SBS. We’re heading into an interview where Kamalle’s going to be interviewed by Channel 7.A little backlight, Pete.There you go, guys. You should be able to hear each other.Hello there.Hi, is it Kamalle? Is that how I say it?Yes, that’s right, yes.Hi, Kamalle. It’s Ray from Channel 7. How’re you going?I’m good. Thank you, Ray.That’s good. Obviously, this story is huge.Media are asking him the same questions over and over again.And what’s her name?Mariam — Mariam Dabboussy.Obviously, now it’s getting very violent. What’s your message to our government about your Australian daughter who’s stuck in a detention camp at the moment?As Kamalle gives these interviews over and over and over and over —[COUGHING]Happy with levels and everything?Yeah, I’m just going to get some cuts.— his body is actually wearing down. He’s getting sick.My name’s Kamalle Dabboussy. I’ve been —But he can’t let himself stop.— not once.He’ll talk to anybody.Have you managed to speak to your daughter while she’s there?We’ve had sporadic contact. Phones are a difficult issue. But there are some central places where you can buy time on a phone.But of course, the real reason that Kamalle came here is to talk to the politicians,the lawmakers who will ultimately decide the fate of these women and children.And so he has meetings lined up with any of them who will listen.Heading on in to speak with Kristina Keneally, who is the shadow minister of home affairs —— just knocking on the door now.Hello. Here we are. Thanks so much.The other one might be — maybe ours. O.K. Catch you later.O.K., do you think there’s a chance they’ll let me in the room?No, not this one. No.O.K.I know this one won’t. Sorry.All right.O.K. I know that.O.K., all right. Catch you afterwards.Thanks.Nice to meet you, man.I’m following him as best I can. But a lot of it is behind closed doors.And from what you can tell, what’s the reception that Kamalle is getting?It’s not a very favorable one. Australia has a conservative government. And a lot of the comments that these lawmakers are making indicate that they are really opposed to bringing these women home. There’s one man in particular, the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, who is especially outspoken. He’s saying things like, based on the evidence that he has received, some of these women could be capable of making bombs or even unleashing what he describes as a mass casualty.Kamalle says that, based on what he knows of these women, they weren’t fighters. He describes them as baby-making machines. He talks about this one girl in particular who went into Syria at 15 and, by 19, she has three children. So this leads him to believe that it’s very possible a lot of these women were coerced. They were forced, including his own daughter. In all the years that Mariam was with ISIS, Kamalle didn’t quite know what to think about what had happened, about how much had been her own choice. But that day in the camp, when he sees her after all that time, he finally gets to ask her. And she told him a story that, when she and her husband, Khaled, had gone to Turkey to stay with his family back in 2015, that, after a few months, he told her and the rest of the family that they needed to go to the Syrian border to rescue a relative who had joined ISIS but now wanted out. And Mariam says, when they get there, all of a sudden, gunshots are ringing into the air. Everybody’s running. There’s mayhem. And then she’s forced at gunpoint, with her child, into a car, which takes them across the border into Syria. And it’s not until Mariam sees this ISIS flag flying from this halfway house that she understands what has happened to her. And Kamalle believes his daughter.Do you see Mariam, in this, purely as a victim? Or do you think she may have made some choices herself?Mariam’s choices have been to survive. I see her purely as a victim. And everything that comes from then has been just to survive. I don’t see her as a perpetrator at all. She is a victim. And any decision she’s made has been solely to survive and for the best interests of her kids. And I firmly believe that.I’m sorry to belabor this point, but I have to ask. These women are Australian women. They grew up in a Western country with Western values. And the idea that they were forced, tricked, duped — that they had no agency whatsoever — I can see why that might be a hard pill for some people in the Australian public to swallow. Because what does that say about women?From the Australian context, I think if you are raised as an Anglo in Anglo communities for most of your life, one might say, I find this hard to believe. But then I’ve also had people come and tell me, you know, if my husband said, let’s go for a holiday, or my husband told me, we’re going to go and do this great humanitarian act of trying to save a family member from a terrible regime, I would be there backing him up 100 percent. And I would be supporting him all the way.So I do get a mixture of views from the public that say that putting myself in those shoes — in Mariam’s shoes — they actually would have supported their husbands.And most of the women that made those choices to go went because they were trying to protect their family unit. And culturally, this is raised as the most important thing in your life — your family, your family, your family. You do whatever you can to save your family unit. And that is the sort of number one cultural value that persists within the Muslim community, is that family unit is so important. So even if your husband’s made a mistake, you still support your husband, even if he’s made a mistake. And that’s the culture the women were raised in, predominantly.But you didn’t raise Mariam like that.No, that’s why he had to trick her to go across the border. Mariam would never have agreed to that. But she wanted family. So even if she’d had a warning sign, she probably would have dismissed it in her brain, because she actually wanted family so much, as well. So yes, she was independent. And yes, she was stubborn. And she was fiery. And she was feisty — or let’s say lively — is lively. But I think, if she had any doubts, until there was something concrete, she would have just been dismissive, because she wanted family so much.So you think maybe there were red flags for her and she pushed them away, because —I think potentially. I think to myself, even if there were some smaller red flags —You know, I think that despite Kamalle’s unwavering belief in his daughters story, he does understand. He understands why people might be afraid for these women to come home. But he also kind of says, that’s not the point. The bigger point here is we don’t know these women’s culpability. So he says, let’s bring them back, and let’s have due process applied before we turn our backs on these women assuming that they’re guilty. He says this is what a country like Australia actually owes its citizens, whether they’re guilty or not guilty. And right now, we just don’t know. Basically, what he’s saying is there are dangers, yes, with repatriating people, but there are also dangers with not. And that’s why he’s in Canberra, fighting for their right to come home.Hi, everyone.Hi.I’m Livia. I’m a reporter with The New York Times.Nice to meet you, Livia.Nice to meet you.How are you?Yes, good. Kamalle.Kamalle — [SPEAKING ARABIC]So I’m following Kamalle around, office to office. It seems like at least some of these lawmakers are empathetic to his plight. But it’s not clear whether they have any power to actually change the situation. There were definitely no promises made. But there’s this moment — he bumps into an M.P. in the hall, an old acquaintance. And this guy says, we’ve been discussing your issue at length this morning. This seems to energize Kamalle. He gets excited. He thinks, things might be about to change. Maybe government was in the process of reaching a decision. But then some time passes, and there’s no news. And there’s really nothing left to do there but wait. So after the last meeting of the day, we leave. We don’t drive back to Melbourne, where Kamalle had been meeting with families. We drive to Sydney, where he lives and where a whole other group of families are awaiting his news.O.K., we are just driving away from Parliament back towards Sydney. It’s about a three-hour trip. It looks like, at this point, there’s no news, and —On the drive, Kamalle seems a little deflated.But he’s still hopeful.O.K., we’re at Trappers. Oh, wow! There’s the giant sheep!Well, I said to the big marina. [LAUGHS]And then Kamalle says, we have to pull over to this place called Trappers.This was a big stop back in the day.They make the best vanilla slice, which is like this puff pastry with custard inside. And he says, this is the best vanilla slice in Australia. So we pull in. We walk inside. Kamalle gets two vanilla slices, one for each of us. And we’re eating, having a coffee. Each of us are just taking a moment, checking the news on our phone. And suddenly, Kamalle is tapping the table, trying to get my attention. He points to his phone. It’s Mariam.I know. I know. I know. And —yeah —about the what?Why? No, that’s not, that’s not the information that we’re getting. That’s not the information that we’re getting.So Kamalle has the phone up to his ear. We’re in a loud cafe. I can’t hear Mariam on the other side.O.K., well, listen —But he’s comforting her.What I can tell you —And he’s calling her an affectionate name.O.K., listen. Listen to me.Listen to me. I have had it confirmed to me from several different sources that the border crossing between Syria and Iraq is open, and it’s working. So that information —The women are just terrified that the Assad regime is going to take over the camp, and that they’ll be raped, tortured, killed. And he’s comforting her and comforting her. And he’s telling her, I was just in Parliament. Somebody told me they had a meeting this morning. There could still be a decision today. I’m doing my best. I’m doing my best.I can tell you that there was a cabinet meeting this morning. I think — I think there is some movement, but we’ve not yet been informed. I am trying to get information as we speak and trying to get contacts and networks to give me some indication.The call goes on for some time. And it’s clear, even just from hearing the one side, that Mariam is becoming increasingly frantic.O.K. Believe me. We have said — all come home. We are all very worried about that. We have been making the statements about that. But —She’s heard that one of the Australian women in the camp is having her citizenship revoked. And she’s panicking.The government have told us and the information that we have is that three people have lost their citizenship, and only three people have lost.Kamalle does his best to calm her down.There’s no confirmation the second one is a woman, no confirmation.But at a certain point —I know that, Baba. Baba — but Baba, I — I don’t think that’s what you’re facing. I don’t think that’s what you’re facing, O.K.?I — Baba — Baba — I know — I know — [CRYING IN ARABIC][CRYING IN ARABIC]They both start crying. And he puts her on speakerphone.(CRYING) [SPEAKING ARABIC]It’s clear that nothing he’s saying is really consoling her.She’s spinning through all of these different scenarios.— as fast as we can. And can I tell you? I was walking through the corridors of Parliament today. And people were stopping me, shaking my hand, telling me, we wish you all the best. We hope you get your children back. Like, strangers stopping me in the corridors of Canberra, doing this.So finally, he says to her, let me talk to my grandson.So she pulls him in. And he’s talking to his grandson. And —[SPEAKING ARABIC]Kamalle’s face just lights up.[SPEAKING ARABIC]He’s having this back and forth with his grandson.[INAUDIBLE].And after that, he talks to Mariam for a few more minutes. And the conversation ends.[SPEAKING ARABIC]And we get back in the car. And Kamalle puts on this 45-minute song in Arabic —[SPEAKING ARABIC] — “She Walked Between Us.”— that he says is one of his favorites.— a 45-minute song.And we’re listening to it as we drive back to Sydney.In the days since Livia traveled to Canberra with Kamalle, Turkey and the Syrian Kurdish forces declared a temporary ceasefire. But even if the ceasefire holds, the Australian government has said they would still consider it too risky to extract the families of ISIS fighters. Officials have said they would not be willing to put other lives in danger to save the women and children. On Friday in Canberra, Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton spoke to reporters. They’ve been fighting in the name of an evil organization, he said. And there are consequences.Livia, I’m thinking back to where Miriam’s story started and to Kamalle saying that, from a young age, she wanted to be part of a big family. And when she got a baby sister, they were very close. I’m just curious whether they have a relationship now.They do, as much as they can, given the circumstances. When I was in Parliament with Kamalle, we had this quiet moment. And he showed me some pictures of Mariam in the camp. And he told me about how, like many of the women there, she wanted to send something home for her family, for her sister. And so she collected these little bits of scrap metal, things she could find. And she made a ring for her sisterand gave it to Kamalle to take home with him.It was —And she also makes her this video. And she says to her sister —Ah, thank you so much for [INAUDIBLE], habibi. I actually look like I’m dying. And I don’t usually look inside a mirror. So this is actually horrible. [CHUCKLES]I’m so sorry. I look horrible. I haven’t looked in a mirror in ages.And she’s like, but I miss you so much. And I’m so excited to see you.Do what you need to do, O.K.? [SIGH] Have a lot of things to catch up on each other when I see you. And I love you. And please, can you look after Dad? He’s acting strong. I don’t know how strong he really is. [SPEAKING ARABIC] I love you, O.K.? And no matter what, you’re always my sister. And I have a lot of things to talk to you about when I see you, inshallah.And I have so, so much to tell you.I love you, habibi. I wish we could have talked more often. I don’t know why we never was able to speak properly. [CHILD CHATTERING] Until — until I’ll be able to talk to you soon.I love you.Thank you for everything, everything. [INAUDIBLE] Love you, habibi.[SIGH] And she’s still there. And she’s still there.She’d also left me a video message, which was absolutely heartbreaking for me to hear. And I haven’t played it again. I only played it once.But they’re still there. And we are here. And they just need to make it safe.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Advertisement