https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/11/us/politics/marie-yovanovitch-ukraine.html
Ukraine Envoy Says She Was Told Trump Wanted Her Out Over Lack of Trust - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
96
AdvertisementSupported byAmbassador Marie L. Yovanovitch was recalled from Ukraine after a long campaign against her by Rudolph Giuliani and his allies. Her boss told her she had “done nothing wrong.”By Sharon LaFraniere, Nicholas Fandos and Andrew E. KramerWASHINGTON — The State Department’s request went in early March to Marie L. Yovanovitch, a longtime diplomat who had served six presidents: Would she extend her term as ambassador to Ukraine, scheduled to end in August, into 2020? Less than two months later came another departmental communiqué: Get “on the next plane” to Washington. Her ambassadorship was over.How and why Ms. Yovanovitch was removed from her job has emerged as a major focus of the impeachment inquiry being conducted by House Democrats. And in nearly nine hours of testimony behind closed doors on Capitol Hill on Friday, Ms. Yovanovitch said she was told after her recall that President Trump had lost trust in her and had been seeking her ouster since summer 2018 — even though, one of her bosses told her, she had “done nothing wrong.”Her version of events added a new dimension to the tale of the campaign against her. It apparently began with a business proposition being pursued in Ukraine by two Americans who, according to an indictment against them unsealed on Thursday, wanted her gone, and who would later become partners with the president’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani in digging up political dirt in Ukraine for Mr. Trump. From there it became part of the effort by Mr. Giuliani to undercut the special counsel’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election and push for damaging information about former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a possible Democratic challenger to Mr. Trump in 2020.In her prepared testimony to House investigators, Ms. Yovanovitch, 60, offered no new details about how Mr. Giuliani’s campaign against her was communicated to the president or how Mr. Trump communicated his demand that she be ordered home. But her opening remarks, provided to The New York Times, amounted to a scathing indictment to Congress of how the Trump administration’s foreign policy intersected with business and political considerations. Americans abroad in search of personal gain or private influence — especially in a country like Ukraine with a long history of corruption and people eager to exploit them — threatened to undermine the work of loyal diplomats and the foreign policy goals of the United States, she said. Her removal, she said, was a case in point.“Although I understand that I served at the pleasure of the president, I was nevertheless incredulous that the U.S. government chose to remove an ambassador based, as best as I can tell, on unfounded and false claims by people with clearly questionable motives,” she said.Ms. Yovanovitch’s testimony, which could help build momentum for the impeachment inquiry, captured the arc of her troubled tenure in Ukraine: how Mr. Giuliani and his allies mounted a campaign against her based on what she described as scurrilous lies, how the State Department capitulated to the president’s demands to recall her, and the upshot — losing an experienced ambassador in a pivotal country that is under threat from Russia and in the middle of a change in government. More broadly, she portrayed the State Department as a whole as “attacked and hollowed out from within.” Unless it backs up its diplomats, especially in the face of false attacks by foreign interests, she said, more of them will leave and the wrong message will be transmitted around the world.“Bad actors” in Ukraine and elsewhere will “see how easy it is to use fiction and innuendo to manipulate our system,” she warned. “The only interests that will be served are those of our strategic adversaries, like Russia.”She had been removed from her post in Ukraine before the events most at the heart of the impeachment inquiry: whether Mr. Trump withheld White House meetings or military aid to Ukraine this summer to pressure its new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, to investigate Mr. Biden and his younger son, Hunter Biden. That Ms. Yovanovitch, who remains a State Department employee, showed up at all to testify was remarkable. In a letter this week, the White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, lashed out at the impeachment inquiry, saying government officials would not testify and that no documents would be provided. The White House did not respond to requests for comment on Friday. transcriptShall we?Should I start?Do it.From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”All this week, we’re in Washington.O.K. This is it.To the bureau.As Congress returns from recess, the impeachment inquiry enters a pivotal phase, and the White House strategy to block the investigation begins to crumble, with five administration officials set to testify before House committees.Washington?O.K., so we’ve got Fiona Hill, the former Russia expert on the National Security Council staff, on the Hill as we speak. She’s behind closed doors.On Monday, those committees heard testimony about why the president removed the longtime ambassador to Ukraine just two months before his fateful call with the president of Ukraine asking for a favor.It’s busy week on the Hill. He’s going to testify. On Thursday, we’ve got another State Department official testifying. Tomorrow —Today: The story of how that ambassador ended up at the center of the impeachment process.It’s Tuesday, October 15.So are you ready for “Daily” retrieval?I am. Where do we go?We’re going to go down to six.O.K., into that — to that dark room?That dark, sweaty room.Yeah, is it sweaty? All right.No, it’s not too sweaty.Sharon LaFraniere is an investigative reporter in the Washington bureau.O.K., go ahead.And we’ll jump in. And it’ll be great. Sharon, tell us about this ambassador, Marie Yovanovitch.So she’s a very experienced diplomat.— Marie Yovanovitch to be ambassador to the Republic of Armenia.She’s a 33-year veteran of the State Department. She’s a three-time ambassador. George W. Bush appointed her to be ambassador to Kyrgyzstan and then to Armenia.It’s an honor for me to appear before you today. I’m honored, also, by the confidence that President Bush and Secretary Rice have shown in me by nominating me for the post of U.S. ambassador to Armenia.And then in August of 2016, President Obama appointed her to be ambassador to Ukraine.So she’s a career diplomat.She’s a career diplomat. And her sort of trademark, what people mostly say about her, is how cautious she is. She is a very careful diplomat.U.S. policy is very clear. Crimea is a part of Ukraine. And we are absolutely rock solid on that.You know, she doesn’t get out over her skis. She’s very, very policy-oriented, very attentive to protocol, propriety, instructions, and just by nature, a cautious person.And we are very active on the diplomatic side to ensure that Russia’s physical occupation of Crimea does not become sort of a creeping occupation through other ways.By the time Trump’s elected, she’s ambassador to Ukraine. She’s been in the embassy as ambassador then for about six months or so, and she continues on. Trump is the sixth president that she has served.Of both parties.Of both parties, correct.There has been a strong bipartisan commitment to Ukraine’s independence, and I’m confident that will continue.So what happens after President Trump renews her ambassadorship?She carries on, and early March, she gets this communiqué from the State Department saying, hey, can you stand? Can we extend your ambassadorship into 2020? And then less than two months later, she gets another communiqué from the State Department, which basically is, word for word, get on the next plane to Washington. And her ambassadorship, at that point, is over.So she’s asked to stay on.She’s asked to stand.And within weeks, she’s told she’s finished.Exactly.And at the time, how much notice does this attract, the fact that she’s essentially fired?Very little. We didn’t write a thing about it.Hmm.I mean, I guess generally, we don’t pay that much attention to ambassadors. They carry out policy. They don’t set policy, so —But, of course, we’re paying attention now.Right. And the question is, was she removed from her job because she somehow or another stood in the way of a kind of corrupt quid pro quo deal that the White House had going with Ukraine? And so more and more is coming out now about why she was recalled so abruptly to Washington. And witness after witness is being asked, what do you know about the whole campaign to drive out Marie Yovanovitch?And what have we learned from those witnesses, from this testimony?So let me take you back to last year, because that’s when it began.Rudy Giuliani, the president’s personal lawyer, had two associates who were working with him and for him in Ukraine. So that’s Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman. They are both U.S. citizens, but they’re working with Giuliani. But they are also working for themselves, for their own personal interests. They are going after Yovanovitch because they think that she is an obstacle to their effort to get a deal with the state-owned gas company that’s run by the Ukraine. And it’s been turned down by the chief executive of this company. And he is a reform-minded executive, and the ambassador is supporting him, and they want to get him out, and they want to get her out, too.O.K., let me just try to understand.O.K., two —Two men who work with Rudy Giuliani, the president’s private lawyer, they are trying to make a buck in Ukraine. They want to do a deal with an energy company there. They’re having some trouble. They blame the C.E.O. of that company for standing in their way, and they simultaneously blame Yovanovitch. Why did they blame her? What’s the connection?American diplomats have always paid attention to Ukraine’s energy policy, because energy is sort of this nexus in which Russia tries to exert influence over Ukraine, and basically, it’s a font of corruption. So the U.S. has always been saying, you know, you need good governance here in your state energy company. So that’s what Yovanovitch was saying. No more backroom deals. You need good governance in this company.And how does Giuliani come into the picture?O.K., so —You must have, like, a whiteboard —Yeah, right.— where you keep track of all these characters.It is. Well, O.K., there’s a parallel track, too, right? There’s another guy, Yuriy Lutsenko. This is a guy who isn’t even a lawyer, but he’s running the prosecutor’s office. He’s also against her, because she’s telling him that you got to clean up the corruption in your prosecutor general’s office. And so she’s putting pressure on him, and he doesn’t like that either. Right? So she’s got these enemies with these two associates of Giuliani. She’s got this enemy in this prosecutor. And all three of those guys sort of join up together along with Giuliani.So just to complete this set of characters that you have brought on stage — you have Giuliani’s associates, you have the prosecutor in Ukraine, you have Rudy Giuliani. All of them begin to see a common foe in this U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, who sees herself as somebody trying to fight corruption and bad business practices in Ukraine.Right. And they start to spread stories about her that she is disloyal to Trump.— Marie Yovanovitch. Yovanovitch, an Obama holdover, remains in the post today. She’s reportedly demonstrated clear anti-Trump bias.That there are private recordings in which she is supposedly disdainful to Trump.She is known and reported by people there to have bad-mouthed the president of the United States, Donald Trump, to have told Ukrainians not to listen to him or obey his policy because he was going to be impeached.So while they’re working in Ukraine, they’re also exporting this campaign against her to the U.S. One person who they approach is Pete Sessions —I, Barack Hussein Obama, do solemnly swear.Remember that? It looked bleak. The press said conservatives were an endangered species. I said it was time to get to work.— who is then a Republican congressman from Texas who’s running for re-election.But I’m not finished yet. We have to roll back the Obama agenda and get businesses hiring nationwide. I’m Pete Sessions, and I approve this message.He is head of the House Rules Committee, so he has a pretty important position. And they say, we are going to help you raise $20,000 for your re-election campaign. And we also want your help in getting Yovanovitch out. So Sessions then does write a letter to Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, and says, this ambassador’s disloyal to Trump.Wow.And that’s really the beginning of the whole campaign against her in the U.S.So these men, after successfully spreading the word that Yovanovitch is no good, in their telling, in Ukraine, they are asking a member of the United States Congress to try to discredit her within the government of the U.S., and he does it.Yes. By this spring, it’s really sort of hit a fever pitch.What do you mean?Well, in that Donald Trump Jr. gets on Twitter and says, we have to get rid of more of these joker ambassadors like her.Mentions her.Yeah, mentions her. And four days later, Giuliani takes a whole packet of information about her, which he’s gathered from these three guys, and puts it in Mike Pompeo’s hands — Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state. Right?Wow.And says, this is a bad ambassador. You have to investigate this.And the result of that is that Mike Pompeo, secretary of state, has this letter from this Republican lawmaker, and he has this packet of negative information about Yovanovitch from Giuliani. And, of course, Pompeo is Yovanovitch’s boss.Correct.So this campaign is coming from a lot of angles.Right.O.K., so what happens next?So next, it’s late April, and she gets that letter from the State Department or some kind of communiqué from the State Department, get on the next plane to Washington. And her boss is about to tell her that her ambassadorship is going to be cut short.And what kind of explanation is given?So the explanation is you haven’t done anything wrong. This is the deputy secretary of state saying this. This isn’t like normal cases when ambassadors are recalled for cause. In other words, you’ve done something really terrible, and we’re — you haven’t done anything wrong.He says that to her?Yes, he says that to her, according to her. But there’s been a campaign against you, a very concerted campaign against you for a long time, and we’ve been under pressure from the president to remove you since the summer of 2018. So we’re bringing you home.He sounds almost embarrassed.Yeah, apologetic, maybe.Hmm, so she just leaves the job.Yep, she leaves the job. And there is a reaction — we don’t know it at the time — but there is a pretty strong reaction within the State Department.What do you mean?Well, at the embassy back in Kiev, the officials who are left there are said to be seething about this, that this is really unusual. This is really bizarre.We’ll be right back.Marie Yovanovitch, I learned this evening that the president has ordered her dismissal from her post as the United States ambassador to Ukraine as a result of her activities there, which were complained of by Congressman Sessions. She —Sharon, so are we to understand, at this point, that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has told the president that he thinks Yovanovitch should go, and that that would suggest that the information Pompeo has received from this Republican congressman and from this packet of information from Giuliani, that this was effective?So we don’t know whether Pompeo told the president that she should go. It could be that the president told Pompeo she should go. We do know Rudy wanted her to go. So maybe Rudy is the key adviser. Maybe he tells the president this is somebody who’s disloyal to you, and the president tells Pompeo, get rid of her. It could have been that way, too.So all we know is that the president removes her from this job.Right. And we know that the State Department said that they were under pressure from the president to remove her for more than a year earlier.And what happens after she’s removed from this job?So about two months after she’s removed from the job, the president and Zelensky, the new Ukrainian president, have this now-famous phone call July 25, and she comes up —Yovanovitch.— in the phone call, yes. And the president says, “The former ambassador from the United States, the woman, was bad news, and the people she was dealing with in the Ukraine were bad news, so I just wanted to let you know that.” And then Zelensky agrees with Trump and says, “It was great that you were the first one who told me she was a bad ambassador, because I agree with you 100 percent.” And then President Trump says, “Well, she’s going to go through some things,” which sounds quite ominous.So whether the fact that the president got rid of the ambassador to Ukraine before turning up the pressure on Ukraine is kind of an open question. We don’t know yet.It is an open question.But It happened two months before this pivotal phone call.Right, which makes you wonder, was somebody trying to get her out of the way? We just don’t know.Right.She doesn’t know, I don’t think.So that Zelensky-Trump telephone call, of course, has led to the impeachment inquiry. Where has Yovanovitch fit in to the inquiry?So she’s going to be at the top of the witness list, right? But the question is, she is still a career official within the State Department.Because she’s fired from her job, but not from the department.Right. So she’s just lying low, and then her name shows up on the witness list. And the House impeachment investigators really want to get her in there and find out what happened. But the White House comes out with this letter saying, we’re not cooperating, the administration is not cooperating. So we’re all wondering is she going to show up, or she’s not going to show up?Does that apply to her?Yeah, no, it definitely applies to her. If the administration is not cooperating, she shouldn’t be cooperating, right? So most of us, I think, are figuring she’s not going to show up. She’s been told not to show up. And then we learn, you know, not too many hours before her testimony that she is showing up.Wow.Are you represented by State Department counsel, or are you —She’s showing up. And she walks through the entrance rather firmly flanked by her lawyer, and she disappears into the secure chambers where the House Intelligence Committee investigators begin to question her, and she doesn’t come out until dark.She testified for nearly nine hours in defiance of the White House directive.Mm-hmm. And what do we know about what she says?We got her opening statement, and it was, I thought, extremely dramatic. I was particularly struck by this one sentence that she wrote, which was, “Although I understand that I served at the pleasure of the president, I was, nevertheless, incredulous that the U.S. government chose to remove an ambassador based, as best as I can tell, on unfounded and false claims by people with clearly questionable motives.” All these things that have been swirling around about me are completely false. The notion I ever said, ignore President Trump’s orders because he’s going to be impeached anyway — I never said such a thing to my embassy colleagues or to anyone else. And then she gets to Giuliani, who she says she thinks she’s met maybe three times. O.K., “I do not know Mr. Giuliani’s motives for attacking me.” But individuals, people named as his associates, may well have believed that their personal financial ambitions were being stymied by our anti-corruption policy in Ukraine. In other words, maybe Giuliani’s friends thought that I was standing in the way of them putting money in their pocket. Maybe that’s what it is about. And she says more broadly that the U.S. foreign policy is going to be in a really bad state if we allow private interests to “circumvent professional diplomats for their own gain, not the public good.” So she’s making a very, very important and broad point about this, is that this is not just about me. It’s chaos in the diplomatic scene. You have an ambassador who — the State Department doesn’t have her back. And she’s being discredited by the president’s own personal lawyer and then, later, by the president himself, in this phone call with the Ukrainian president. And that’s not just a, you know, cautionary tale about her. That’s a tale for a lot of diplomats who put themselves in harm’s way to serve the nation, as she says. So she doesn’t mention Mike Pompeo by name, but it’s clear that she feels that the State Department didn’t stand up for her and should have. She’s raising serious issues there, but they’re not really political issues, they’re issues of good governance and good administration.But to many people listening, her removal from this position as ambassador is providing a lot of ammunition to what has become a pretty political matter, which is the impeachment inquiry.Right. So the question about how did she lose her job? Why did she lose her job? Who drove her out? This is really central to the inquiry. And even if she didn’t provide the answers because maybe she doesn’t really know, other people are going to be asked about it. And beyond the issue of what she does know or doesn’t know, did say or didn’t say, just the fact that she showed up alone is significant, really remarkable.And testified.And testified. Are more people like her going to follow suit? Are they going to say, you know, we don’t care what the White House says, we’re making our own decision? And one example of that is Gordon Sondland, who is the U.S. ambassador for the European Union. First, he was going to testify. Then the White House, the State Department directed him not to testify, so he was taken off the schedule. And now he’s back on the schedule because he wants to testify for his own reasons, which are probably that he doesn’t want to be painted as the bad guy in this. So he’s worried about his own reputation.I’m curious what’s happened to all of the people who worked so hard to discredit Yovanovitch and ended up getting her removed from this job. What has happened to them?Parnas and Fruman were arrested around 6:00 p.m. last night at Dulles Airport as they were about to board an international flight with one-way tickets.So the two associates of Rudy Giuliani, they were arrested for campaign finance violations, including, in part, for their contribution to Pete Sessions, which was allegedly in return for his help in getting the ambassador out. They’re sitting in the Alexandria Detention Center now.They’re in jail.They’re in jail.Tonight, both Karen and I address you with great thoughts of not just thanks, but great thoughts of how important these 22 years have been.Sessions lost his re-election, and he is concerned that his political career has been seriously harmed by these allegations. Giuliani —Well, I don’t know. I haven’t spoken to Rudy. I spoke to him yesterday, briefly. He’s a very good attorney, and he has been my attorney. Yeah, sure.— is now under investigation himself for whether he was acting as a foreign agent for the Ukraine in his efforts to oust the ambassador.And, of course, the president is being investigated in an impeachment inquiry.Right.Some people who went after her are going through some things.[CHUCKLES] Sharon, thank you very much.Thank you for having me.The Times reports that in closed-door testimony on Monday, President Trump’s former top adviser on Russia, Fiona Hill, testified that she strongly objected to the removal of Marie Yovanovitch as ambassador to Ukraine, but that her advice was ignored. Hill recounted that Rudy Giuliani’s conduct was so alarming that national security adviser John Bolton told her to alert White House lawyers about it, and that Bolton described Giuliani as, quote, “a hand grenade who’s going to blow everybody up.” Despite objections from the White House, the leaders of the impeachment inquiry are scheduled to hear from several more State Department officials over the coming days, including the former senior adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, the deputy assistant secretary of state responsible for Ukraine, and the ambassador to the European Union, who became deeply involved in the effort to pressure Ukraine to investigate Trump’s rivals.We’ll be right back.So do you think that he’s, like, busy?I don’t know. We’ll have to see.He might be gone.Hey, Michael. How you doing?How are you? Nice to see you.How you been?I’m good. How on deadline are you?Right now? Not really.Give me a “here’s what else you need to know today.”Here’s what else you need to know today.O.K., Eric Schmitt, can I just ask you about what happened in Syria on Monday?So three main things happened in Syria on Monday. The first is the Turkish offensive continued, continued deeper into Syrian territory.The second thing that happened was that the Syrian Kurds, who’d been allied to the Americans, they’d cut a deal with a new partner: President Assad, the Syrian government. And so Syrian government troops started moving into the territory that the Kurds used to hold. In response to all this —The president announced that there would be sanctions forthcoming if Turkey moved forward with these actions.The United States finally acts, and that the president announces there’ll be economic sanctions against Turkey for what it’s done.So effective immediately, we have sanctioned three of the ministers — the minister of defense, the minister of interior, and the minister of energy.But American officials I talked to today, particularly military officers who have served over in northeastern Syria, said it’s too little, too late. The sanctions, at this point, doesn’t matter. Tens if not hundreds of thousands of people will be displaced. ISIS fighters are breaking out of jails left and right. And all this has happened just a little over in the last week.President Trump made it very clear that the United States is going to continue to take actions against Turkey’s economy until they bring the violence to an end. We want an immediate cease fire, and we want to begin negotiations between Turkey and Syrian defense forces. We have great concerns about civilian populations.From the Washington bureau of The Times, that’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Ms. Yovanovitch’s defiance of the administration’s directive against appearing before the impeachment proceeding raises the possibility that other government officials will follow suit. She called upon the State Department leaders and Congress to defend the institution, saying “I fear that not doing so will harm our nation’s interest, perhaps irreparably.”The turnabout appeared to validate the tactics adopted by Democrats, who have issued rapid-fire subpoenas since they opened the inquiry two weeks ago and warned that any attempts by the administration to block their fact-finding will promptly become fodder for an article of impeachment charging Mr. Trump with obstructing Congress. When the State Department tried late Thursday to direct Ms. Yovanovitch not to appear, the Democrats promptly issued a subpoena and told her she had no choice but to appear.At least one other State Department official is also expected to testify, despite the White House policy. Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union who was initially expected to testify this week but failed to show up, has now been rescheduled for next week. Mr. Sondland is close to Mr. Trump and could support the White House’s narrative that the administration’s policy in Ukraine has been driven by a focus on rooting out corruption.Ms. Yovanovitch, a 33-year veteran of the foreign service, had held two previous ambassadorships when President Barack Obama appointed her as envoy to Ukraine in mid-2016. She was deeply steeped in the region and American policy.But in 2018, she found herself targeted by two American businessmen, Lev Parnas, who was born in Ukraine and Igor Fruman, who was born in Belarus. Both came to play central roles in Mr. Giuliani’s efforts on behalf of Mr. Trump in Ukraine.But at first, the two men were focused on their own business dealings. One possible reason for their opposition to Ms. Yovanovitch was that they perceived her to be standing in the way of a business plan they were promoting. Ms. Yovanovitch was a supporter of a reform-minded chief executive of Naftogaz, Ukraine’s state energy company. The two men were hoping to sell American liquefied natural gas to Naftogaz, but the chief executive, Andriy Kobolyev, had rejected their proposal. American diplomats traditionally pay close attention to the energy industry in Ukraine, long a font of corruption and an avenue for Russia to influence Ukrainian politics. In that same vein, Ms. Yovanovitch had supported Mr. Kobolyev to curb back room deals. Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman had a plan to replace Mr. Kobolyev: they suggested to another Naftogaz executive that using their political ties in the United States, they could install him in Mr. Kobolyev’s place if he accepted their business deal. Those negotiations were described by Dale Perry, an American energy executive and former business partner of a Naftogaz executive, who is familiar with the conversations.The pair also had a plan to replace the ambassador. They tried to undermine her with the Ukrainian government and news media by spreading stories that she was an Obama holdover who disdained Mr. Trump, interviews show. “I found it very troubling and disturbing that a couple of business people, and whoever they were working with, could claim to remove a U.S. ambassador,” Mr. Perry said.Promising to help him raise $20,000 toward his re-election, they enlisted the help of Pete Sessions, who was then a Republican congressman from Texas then serving as the powerful head of the House Rules Committee, according to an indictment unsealed on Thursday charging Mr. Parnas, Mr. Fruman and two other men with violating campaign finance laws. Mr. Sessions sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo claiming without evidence that the ambassador was disloyal to the president. Ms. Yovanovitch also had repeated run-ins with Ukraine’s prosecutor general, Yuriy Lutsenko, over allegations of corruption with the prosecutor’s office. Mr. Lutsenko would also come to work closely with Mr. Giuliani on the effort to help Mr. Trump.As they pursued their own agenda in Ukraine in 2018, Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman were also working more closely to dig up political dirt with Mr. Giuliani, with whom Mr. Parnas also had a separate business relationship. As part of that effort, Mr. Giuliani seized on criticism of Ms. Yovanovitch as another way to suggest that she was disloyal to Mr. Trump and could have been part of an effort to undercut him from Ukraine during the 2016 campaign.Mr. Giuliani helped encourage further stories in conservative news outlets critical of her early in 2019, even as the State Department was asking her to remain in Ukraine until next year. Some State Department officials were distressed by the critical news reports. Philip Reeker, an acting assistant secretary of state, told an adviser to Mr. Pompeo in an email that in casting her as a “liberal outpost,” critics were pushing a “fake narrative” that “really is without merit or validation.”By this March, the attacks against Ms. Yovanovitch were reverberating in the president’s own circle. Donald Trump Jr., the president’s oldest son, posted a link on social media to an item that described the ambassador as “an anti-Trump, Obama flunkey.” In his tweet, Mr. Trump called for fewer of “these jokers as ambassadors. “Four days later, Mr. Giuliani hand-delivered to Mr. Pompeo a packet of news articles and material critical of Ms. Yovanovitch. It included notes on an interview with a former prosecutor general of Ukraine, who had met with Mr. Giuliani. The former prosecutor claimed that Ms. Yovanovitch had blocked him from getting a visa to the United States and “is close to Mr. Biden.”In late April, Ms. Yovanovitch received the message summoning her back to Washington to be told of her removal.Mr. Fruman and Mr. Parnas were arrested Wednesday night at Dulles International Airport, on their way out of the country and charged with campaign finance violations, related in part to their dealings with Mr. Sessions. Prosecutors said they were working with at least one unnamed Ukrainian official who wanted to oust Ms. Yovanovitch. Ms. Yovanovitch told House investigators that while she did not know Mr. Giuliani’s motives for attacking her, his associates “may well have believed that their personal financial ambitions were stymied by our anti-corruption policy in Ukraine.”Her sudden removal left American diplomats in Kiev seething. They told reporters privately that Ms. Yovanovitch had been treated shabbily and that Mr. Giuliani’s freelancing diplomacy was undercutting their efforts to work with the new Ukrainian president’s administration.The status of the documents and witness testimony being collected by congressional investigators.She recounted her conversation about her ouster with John Sullivan, the deputy secretary of state, at some length. While Ms. Yovanovitch was testifying, Mr. Trump nominated Mr. Sullivan to be the next ambassador to Russia. The timing appeared to be coincidental.In a meeting in Washington, she said Mr. Sullivan told her “that this was not like other situations where he had recalled ambassadors for cause.” He added “that there had been a concerted campaign against me and that the department had been under pressure from the president to remove me since the summer of 2018.” She expressed dismay and disappointment about her experience, and predicted serious consequences if the State Department failed to defend itself as an institution. “The harm will come not just through the inevitable and continuing resignation and loss of many of this nation’s most loyal and talented public servants,” she said.“It also will come when those diplomats who soldier on and do their best to represent our nation face partners abroad who question whether the ambassador truly speaks for the president and can be counted upon as a reliable partner. The harm will come when private interests circumvent professional diplomats for their own gain, not the public good.” Sharon LaFraniere and Nicholas Fandos reported from Washington, and Andrew E. Kramer from Kiev, Ukraine.Advertisement