https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/23/us/politics/trump-impeachment.html
The Trump Impeachment Inquiry: Latest Updates - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
103
AdvertisementSupported byHouse Republicans staged a protest outside a secure committee room, delaying a deposition for hours, while House Democrats sent a new request to the State Department for key documents.About two dozen House Republicans, chanting “Let us in! Let us in!” stormed the secure room where a Defense Department official arrived Wednesday morning to testify in the impeachment inquiry, refusing to leave and delaying her testimony for hours. The lawmakers — most of whom do not sit on the committees conducting the inquiry and are therefore not entitled to attend its hearings — said they were protesting the closed-door nature of the proceedings, which have been open to members of both parties on the committees. The security director of the House Intelligence Committee, a nonpartisan official, summoned the sergeant-at-arms to respond to the uninvited House Republicans, some of whom brought cellphones, which are forbidden in the secure suite.The chaotic scene in the bowels of the Capitol unfolded as the panel was getting ready to hear from Laura K. Cooper, the deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia, who was appearing despite the Defense Department’s announcement that it would not comply with a House subpoena to provide investigators documents related to the inquiry. Ms. Cooper ultimately began her deposition in the afternoon.Republicans are hammering Democrats for limiting attendance at the hearings to members of the Intelligence, Judiciary and Foreign Affairs Committees. It is common practice for sensitive congressional investigations to be conducted in closed hearings, at least in their preliminary stages. House Republicans did just that when they controlled the chamber and opened an inquiry into the 2012 attack on the United States Embassy in Benghazi, Libya.Democrats have said that they plan to hold open hearings after the committees finish deposing witnesses, and that they intend to make public complete transcripts of witness testimony after they have been reviewed for any classified material. In a news conference before beginning their demonstration, Republicans denounced the inquiry in hyperbolic terms.Representative Andy Biggs, Republican of Arizona, called it a “Soviet-style impeachment process.”  Representative Ted Lieu, Democrat of California, accused the protesting Republicans of trying to stymie the investigation. He said it was unclear if ethics violations would be filed against the members who brought phones into the secure room.“They violated House rules by trying to crash committees which they don’t sit on,” he said. “All this is an attack right on the investigation, and so when you don’t have law or the facts, you attack and disrupt the process.”— Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Emily Cochrane and Michael D. ShearPresident Trump began another day assailing the impeachment inquiry, taking aim at the account delivered behind closed doors on Tuesday by William B. Taylor Jr., the top United States diplomat in Ukraine. In his testimony, Mr. Taylor tied Mr. Trump directly to an effort to withhold both military aid and a White House meeting from Ukraine until the Ukrainian president announced that his country was investigating Democrats.On Twitter, Mr. Trump approvingly quoted a Republican member of Congress saying neither Mr. Taylor nor any other witness had “provided testimony that the Ukrainians were aware that military aid was being withheld.”But in fact, word of the aid freeze had gotten to high-level Ukrainian officials by the first week in August, according to interviews and documents obtained by The New York Times.The timing of the communications about the issue, which have not previously been reported, shows that Ukraine was aware the White House was holding up the funds weeks earlier than United States and Ukrainian officials had acknowledged. And it means that the Ukrainian government was aware of the freeze during most of the period in August when Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and two American diplomats were pressing President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to make a public commitment to the investigations being sought by Mr. Trump.The Ukrainians appear to have initially been hopeful that the problem could be resolved quietly and were reluctant to risk a public clash at a delicate time in relations between the two nations.— Andrew E. Kramer and Kenneth P. VogelHouse impeachment investigators leveled new demands of the State Department on Wednesday, requesting access to communications, notes and memorandums related to American policy toward Ukraine that could bolster damning witness testimony. Among the documents House Democrats are requesting are summaries of key executive branch meetings, diplomatic cables about Mr. Trump’s decision to freeze $391 million in security assistance for Ukraine, and texts, emails and other records created as Mr. Trump and his allies sought to pressure Ukraine into undertaking investigations into his political rivals.The request came from three Democratic committee leaders guiding the inquiry: Representative Adam B. Schiff, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee; Representative Eliot L. Engel, the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee; and Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, the acting chairwoman of the Oversight and Reform Committee. “These documents include information central to the inquiry’s core area of investigation: the president’s efforts to press Ukraine to initiate investigations that would benefit his personal and political interests, and not the national interest,” the three Democrats wrote. In keeping with confidentiality rules around the investigation, the three Democrats did not specifically identify the documents in question, but they appeared to match descriptions of records referred to in recent days by key witnesses.On Tuesday, William B. Taylor Jr., the top American diplomat in Ukraine, told the committees that he kept detailed notes of his time in Kiev that allowed him to recreate a damning portrait of events in his testimony. He also referred to memos, including a June 30 account of his conversation with the Ukrainian president, that could provide new avenues of investigation for Democrats if they get their hands on them. He also mentioned a late-August cable he composed “describing the ‘folly’ I saw in withholding military aid to Ukraine at a time when hostilities were still active.”A lawyer for Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union, indicated before his deposition with investigators that he had produced communications and other records to the State Department that he hoped would be handed over to investigators. They were not.Another former State Department official told investigators that one of his former colleagues, George Kent, had written a memo documenting an early October meeting with a State Department lawyer about how to respond to the impeachment inquiry that had alarmed him.The Democrats did not put a due date on their request, and for now have chosen not to issue a subpoena. The State Department defied an earlier, broader subpoena to the State Department for a swath of potential records related to the case. But it may be more difficult for the department to justify this more narrow request, particularly given the political pressure created by the testimony from Mr. Taylor, Mr. Sondland and others.— Nicholas FandosOne of the two indicted associates of President Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, on Wednesday tied the case to the president himself, saying that some of the evidence gathered in the investigation could be subject to executive privilege.The unusual argument was raised by a defense lawyer in federal court in Manhattan as the two associates, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, pleaded not guilty to federal charges that they had made illegal campaign contributions to political candidates in the United States in exchange for potential influence.Edward B. MacMahon Jr., a lawyer for Mr. Parnas, said the potential for the White House to invoke executive privilege stemmed from the fact that Mr. Parnas had used Mr. Giuliani as his own lawyer at the same time Mr. Giuliani was working as Mr. Trump’s lawyer.Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman have become unexpected figures in the events at the heart of the impeachment inquiry, having played a role in helping Mr. Giuliani’s efforts to dig up information in Ukraine against the president’s political rivals.Mr. Giuliani has denied wrongdoing but has acknowledged that he and the two men worked with officials in Ukraine to collect damaging information about the American ambassador to Ukraine and other targets of Mr. Trump and his allies.— Nicole Hong and William K. RashbaumKashyap Patel, a National Security Council aide who figured prominently in Republicans’ efforts to undermine the Russia investigation, is drawing attention from House Democrats in their impeachment inquiry, according to people briefed on the matter.Senior White House officials suspected that Mr. Patel, who goes by Kash and is not assigned to work on Ukraine policy, was ferrying documents about Ukraine in recent months to President Trump, effectively creating another back channel to him that could warp American policy, according to congressional testimony and interviews.Colleagues grew alarmed after hearing that Mr. Trump had referred to Mr. Patel as one of his top Ukraine policy specialists and that the president wanted to discuss related documents with him, according to people briefed on the matter. The contents of the documents were not clear, nor was it clear how Mr. Trump got them. Friends of Mr. Patel dismissed the concerns among senior national security officials as conspiracy theories by Mr. Trump’s critics. The White House declined to comment.House impeachment investigators are scrutinizing Mr. Patel’s actions as well, the people said. The investigators have asked witnesses about Mr. Patel and are trying to determine any role he played in the shadow foreign policy Mr. Trump was conducting as he pushed the Ukrainian government to incriminate his political rivals by announcing investigations into them.Fiona Hill, the National Security Council’s former senior director for Eurasian and Russian affairs, testified to House investigators last week that she believed Mr. Patel was improperly getting involved in Ukraine policy and was sending information to Mr. Trump, some of the people said.— Julian E. Barnes, Adam Goldman and Nicholas FandostranscriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: Before the career diplomats who deal with Ukraine discovered a shadowy power structure around President Trump that was determined to undermine and derail them, a little-known Trump cabinet secretary said that the same thing happened to him. A conversation with former Secretary of Veterans Affairs David Shulkin.It’s Thursday, October 24.Do you go by Secretary —Secretary.— or Doctor?Secretary.Secretary?Yeah.O.K. So I want to start with the email that you sent me, because I think it was interesting. You describe yourself as somebody who was fired essentially by a tweet from the president, and that that came after an ordeal that you went through that involved political appointees essentially undermining you. And you call the experience strangely, unusually relevant these days, with the issue of interference by outside political influences, and you specifically mentioned what happened to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine. And you said we should perhaps talk about it on “The Daily.” So here you are.Well, at the time, of course, this all seemed very unique to me. But as I’ve now been out of the Trump administration for almost 18 months, I have noticed a similarity in the behaviors and the patterns.There’s a lot of talk about how the State Department seems to be sidelined in this administration —— the senior State Department official in charge of Ukraine policy, George Kent, told House Committee lawmakers Tuesday he was sidelined from his job —— that William Taylor told congressional investigators there were, quote, “two channels” for policymaking on Ukraine, quote, “one regular and one highly irregular.”Certainly here investigators want to know more about how Yovanovitch ultimately became benched in this entire thing, how she became sidelined.So I want to get to that and why you think what happened to you is similar, but I want to start with your story — your experience with the Trump administration. How is it that you came to be considered for a cabinet position by President Trump?Well, I was in the Obama administration. I was a presidential appointee. I was the undersecretary of health for the Department of Veterans Affairs. I had come from the private sector, where I’d been running hospitals, and if I was given the opportunity to help, I didn’t feel like I could say no. So I spent 18 months in the Obama administration, and I was watching very closely about who the Trump administration would choose for its leadership positions in the V.A. But as a political appointee of the Obama administration, I was preparing to leave like everyone else. I had prepared my resignation letter for January 20th, and every day I would hear that there was a new person being speculated on as the secretary of V.A. And as time went on, we found ourselves into January, just a few weeks right before the inauguration, without any idea of who that secretary would be.We begin with a Fox News alert. We’re awaiting the start of that news conference with President-elect Donald Trump. His first —I happen to have heard that the president-elect on January 11th was going to be giving a press conference. Then as I was watching the teaser on one of the cable networks, the reporter at the very end said the President-elect may be announcing the new Secretary of V.A.Thank you very much. It’s very —And I thought, if I had time, because I had a very busy day, I’d like to watch that —See who he chooses?Yeah.— for the veterans. And by the way, speaking of veterans, I appointed today the head secretary of the Veterans Administration, David Shulkin. And we’ll do a news release in a little while. I’ll tell you about David. He’s fantastic.And I watched the press briefing to find out that he announced me as secretary.So you learn that you will be secretary of the V.A. by watching the news, and the breaking news on television is literally breaking news to you?Yes.O.K., so you start this job already with a feeling that this is going to be unorthodox. So I’m curious, how does this experience begin, and when do you start to detect what you described at the beginning of our conversation and that email that you sent us as something resembling interference?Well, I started to understand that I should stop thinking about this new administration the way that the Obama administration ran. The way the White House worked, from my perspective when I was in the Obama administration, it was a very tightly run ship. In the new administration, there was not a tight approach to how you navigated through the White House and had access to the president. It was pretty loose. So I’m the only member of the cabinet at this point who had been in their job, essentially, and in the administration prior, so I knew what needed to happen. I had a plan. So this looseness in the White House was something that I actually found very refreshing, and I was able to use, I think, to the advantage of the department and to veterans, in that, while others were just learning about their agencies, I knew what we needed to do. So the first large part of the year after the inauguration was a time of great productivity, but I think there were a couple events that started to make me question and wonder whether there was a dual path of decision-making in the White House.One event happened to be nationally televised.I want to thank you all for being here.We were sitting in the Roosevelt Room with the president next to me, and he turned to me, and he said —We’re having a meeting tonight at what we call, affectionately, the “Southern White House.” Seems to be the most convenient location. Everybody always wants to go to the Southern White House.— so, will I see you in Florida this weekend at the meeting on veterans policy and veterans issues?So are you going to be at that meeting? You heard about it, right? It’s going to be great. All about the V.A.And that was the first time I’d heard about it.Even though you are the secretary of Veterans Affairs?Yes. And so I looked at him, and I smiled, because I thought it was somewhat humorous, and I just shook my head no. And I remember that time, because my daughter, Jenny, sent me a email saying that I was now a meme. And I didn’t know what a meme was, so I had to Google being a meme. And I quickly learned what a meme was, and saw that there was this meme of me shaking my head no. I had no idea what he was talking about.So the meme was of a cabinet secretary being out of the loop?Yes, yes. But there clearly were these two paths of information about veterans issues — the ones that came directly for me, and the ones that were coming from other people.And what did you learn about who was providing this alternate path of information? Who are these people?I think that there was a group of appointees — political appointees — in the Department of Veterans Affairs that would, on a regular basis, go over to the White House and have meetings on their own. The Department of Veterans Affairs gets about 30 of these political appointees. They are often appointed because of their political allegiance. They come off the campaign, or they’re found to be supportive of the administration, and they get placed in the department in key roles. So we had about 30 of them.O.K., so what do you understand about why there would be a parallel system? Like, what would be necessary about that? Why would anyone construct a second path of information to the president?Well —I mean, they’ve got you.Well, part of this is speculation, since they weren’t willing to surface these issues and policy disagreements with me, but I believe that there were two issues. One was that they didn’t feel that I was moving fast enough and aggressive enough to fix the department. And I think that that is a reasonable point of view. I was balancing what I believed the pace that the organization could handle change and also what veterans wanted. But secondly, there was a basic disagreement over how fast and how far I was willing to take resources from the V.A. and shift them to the private sector.And what did the background figures you’re describing here, what did they want when it comes to privatization?Our biggest disagreement sounds technical, but it turns out to be very important. They’re called access standards, and the access standards are the rules in which veterans can choose to go outside of the V.A. health care system and get their care.To a private doctor that’s not in the V.A.?To a private doctor that’s not in the V.A. And philosophically, I was in agreement that every veteran should have a choice about where they get their care, but I wanted to do this in a way that would not destroy the current V.A. system. Because my belief is that the V.A. is doing things that the private sector is not doing well, and therefore we needed to keep this a strong system and actually enhance its capabilities. But those that argued for open access standards immediately, my concern was we would see such an immediate shift in resources before the V.A. could be fixed that it would ultimately lead to a complete privatization of the department. The way I described it, it was like turning on a faucet.Rather than turning it on full thrust all of a sudden, I wanted to turn it on slowly and give the V.A. system and the private sector time to adapt to this type of philosophical change. So I believe that that was the issue that I fought hardest on and ultimately ended up costing me my job.We’ll be right back.How does this other faction respond to your resistance to the speed and the scale of what they’re pushing for, which is a much broader privatization plan than I think it sounds like you’re comfortable with?Well, the legislative proposal with the approach that I believe is the right one gets presented to the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee, which is a half-Republican, half-Democratic committee. And the vote is taken in the Senate committee — 14 in favor of the approach that I want to take, and one person, one senator, opposing it.Good sign for you.I thought so. But the White House sided strongly with the one senator who wanted the much more aggressive access standards. And ultimately, the bill that got passed was the version that the one senator wanted.I guess I’m trying to understand — when you say the White House supported a different vision in the Veterans’ Affairs Committee, what does that mean, the White House? Aren’t you part at the White House? You’re the secretary of the V.A., so what does that even mean?It was a very confusing situation, because normally, the secretary speaks for the administration, and I was directly speaking to the president and had the president’s support. So this is where I became aware that there was a dual decision-making process even in the White House itself. What clearly was happening behind the scenes was that there was back-channel information being given to the president, ultimately to the point that he must have decided, with that information, that I actually wasn’t following policy that he wanted to happen. But that was a surprise to me.And that back-channel information, as best you can tell, who was it coming from?I have no idea.So it feels like you’re now in this kind of upside-down world, where you are supposed to be the most powerful person in the V.A., you are now fighting your own administration over legislation, and people around you are kind of eager to circumvent you and cut you out of the process. But they are leaving you in place. You are very much the undisputed secretary of the V.A. So how or when does that start to change?I think that this situation, where there was clearly a battle for who was going to be making the policy, got to the point that this group of political appointees felt that they wanted to see somebody else running the department, and out of frustration, I think, started to resort to ways to try to decrease the authority and the effectiveness that I had. And that’s where I believe that they perfected the art of the leak.In Washington, an allegation, even without fact, has a way of taking a life on its own. So there was information leaked about my travel, and there was misinformation that a trip to Europe was a inappropriate trip, where, in fact, what was not reported was that this trip to Europe was the Five Eyes conference, which were the five allies that have met for 45 years, attended by every secretary of the V.A. previously. And the allegation being that my wife was paid for to be able to attend this trip on a shopping vacation or a European vacation. In fact, the United Kingdom, who was the host of this event in London, had officially invited my wife, who is a physician, who attended these meetings and lectures. And a travel arrangement like this was months in the planning, where everything, especially my wife’s travel, was vetted by the V.A. ethics attorneys, by other staff members in the V.A., by the White House, by the State Department. We did not accept any per diems or any other funds associated with this, but there was an allegation that this was done inappropriately, when, in fact, I just relied upon the V.A., who makes my travel arrangements to do this. Now, when a secretary travels, there are two itineraries that are produced. There is a public itinerary about the public appearances, and then there is an itinerary that is prepared for security about every stop and every place that the secretary will be. Those are confidential. Those were leaked to the press, as well.So it sounds like you’re seeing leaks, in this case, of secure documents that only your internal staff would have access to, given to the press to suggest that you are crossing lines — that, for example, you and your family are cashing in on your position as secretary of the V.A., and this is a very intentional sabotaging of your status.Yes, that’s right. And while I’m a scientist, I’m a physician, so I don’t like to jump to conclusions unless I have facts. And so while many people were telling me that I was being sabotaged, that people were working against me, I chose not to make a conclusion until I had facts. And then one day, my deputy secretary brings to me a email that his staff member found left on the copy machine. It is from the senior political appointee to other political appointees that says, here is the plan. We are going to work to replace the secretary.Wow.We are going to replace the deputy secretary, because he’s not politically aligned with us — a lifelong Republican, by the way. We are going to replace the chief of staff, and we’re going to replace the acting undersecretary. And we’re going to put in place people that are politically aligned with us.Who leaves that memo on the copy machine?It was careless.But it was also very explicit and candid.And now, as a scientist, I had my evidence. I actually now could see exactly what was going on.So I just want to be clear. Prior to all this, you very well understand that there are people talking behind your back about policy, going to the president, telling him, this is what should be done, that might differ from you. But now it’s advanced to a different place, where these people aren’t just happy talking around your back, they are trying to stab you in the back. They’re trying to get rid of you.That’s correct.Did it ever occur to you, because you are secretary of the V.A., just to fire a bunch of these people who seem to be very much working to undermine you, because you are their boss?It’s exactly what I did. I tried to remove them.And what happened?They were told by the White House that they would not be removed, and I was told to stand down by the White House, that I could not remove them.Wow.That emboldened them, knowing that they were protected.So tell me the story of how this all kind of came to a head.Well, there had been lots of speculation about whether I would resign, or whether the president would replace me. I was talking to the president on a regular basis, and I was talking very specifically to General Kelly, who was chief of staff. And on the day that I was fired, I had heard a rumor that maybe I would be fired that day, so I called General Kelly and I said, look, here’s what I’m hearing. And he said, I don’t know anything about it. Let me check into it and call you back. And he called me back promptly, as he often did, and he said, David, I checked into it. There’s no truth to it. I spoke to the president. You have his confidence. Keep on doing what you’re doing. And then about noon that day, the president called me, and we had a discussion about what was happening at V.A. And I was able to tell him that we were working very hard and about to deliver three new policy objectives for him, and he was inquisitive about those policy objectives — a normal conversation — and said, keep going on doing what you’re doing, and let’s talk more about it tomorrow. And about five hours later —Breaking news from the White House tonight. President Trump fired his secretary of Veterans Affairs, David Shulkin. President has tweeted, “I am pleased to announce that I intend to nominate highly respected Admiral Ronnie L. Jackson, MD, as the new Secretary of Veterans Affairs,” which means the current Veterans Affairs secretary David Shulkin has now resigned. Why —And that’s really the only and last time that I heard from the president.Was in a tweet?Yes.So in the end, it sounds like you see yourself as a Trump appointee, very committed to the mission of your department, who was systematically undermined by political appointees who were really determined to push through their agenda and what they saw as the president’s agenda kind of at all costs. And that you became an obstacle. And that does sound kind of familiar in this moment. What do you see as the parallels to what has just happened when it comes to Ukraine? I assume you have been following it just as closely as we have.Well, I think being a public servant focused on the mission of improving services to Americans, and then feeling that misinformation is being presented to the president by people who have other agendas that shortens your ability to serve, I think, is something that doesn’t work for the overall benefit of government. The parallels that I see are that there are outside people who ultimately end up having a big impact on the way the government runs, and I do think that what we’re seeing with the way that the president tends to get information from select individuals, that that really has a big influence on the way that decisions are being made. And it’s important that a president get the right information so they can make the right decisions. And my concern is that we may put policies in place that have consequences for decades to come.And finally, secretary, why is this story important for you to be telling? Not a lot of former secretaries in this administration — former generals, former national security advisers — talk about these experiences.Yeah, I think it’s a duty to share what one’s learned in government, with the result of trying to make this better. I am not trying to throw mud at anybody or to make criticisms of any particular political party. I am trying to be transparent about what happened in my experience so that we can learn from it and make a government that works better for all of us.I mean, your book is called, “It Shouldn’t Be This Hard to Serve Your Country.”That’s right. I am very concerned about the future of public service, and I’m concerned about the future for our veterans. And to have people who are willing to come from the private sector, like myself, and help in government and serve to be put through this type of situation in this type of environment, I think, is going to end up being a big problem for people wanting to come in the future. And so when I say it shouldn’t be this hard to serve your country, the scenario of being systematically undermined I don’t think is a good thing for us in terms of the way that we should be running this country.I wonder, can you confidently recommend, if someone comes to you, to serve in a position in the cabinet right now?My hope is that people will continue to raise their hand to want to serve, but anybody who were to choose to go into this administration needs to understand that it’s likely not to end well, and that people have to be clear about the principles that they have and their belief system and make sure that they stick to that.Secretary, thank you very much.Thank you.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.I’m gathered here with dozens of my congressional colleagues underground in the basement of the Capitol, because if, behind those doors, they intend to overturn the results of an American presidential election, we want to know what’s going on.In a dramatic act of protest, House Republicans stormed into the secure offices where impeachment investigators have been hearing testimony behind closed doors and temporarily disrupted the proceedings. The Republicans, all allies of President Trump, demanded that the impeachment testimony be held in public. But because none of the Republicans are members of the committees conducting the hearings, they were eventually removed from the secure offices. And —My fellow Americans, I greet you this morning from the White House to announce a major breakthrough toward achieving a better future for Syria and for the Middle East. It’s been a long time.In a surprise move on Wednesday, President Trump said he would end the economic sanctions he imposed against Turkey for its deadly invasion of Syria just a week after creating them, saying that he trusted Turkey to abide by a ceasefire.So the sanctions will be lifted unless something happens that we’re not happy with.But in a sign of bipartisan fury over Trump’s approach, Democratic and Republican senators challenged the president’s special envoy to Syria, James Jeffrey, about the original decision to withdraw U.S. troops from Syria, which allowed Turkey to kill hundreds of Kurds and for ISIS fighters to escape from prisons.And you know, Ambassador Jeffrey, I have the greatest respect for you. But one can try to put lipstick on a pig, but it’s still a pig. One can ultimately call capitulation a victory, but it’s still capitulation. And one can ultimately have a retreat and say it’s strategic, but it’s still a retreat. And that’s, I feel, exactly what’s happened here.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.President Trump repeatedly pressured President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to investigate people and issues of political concern to Mr. Trump, including former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. Here’s a timeline of events since January.A C.I.A. officer who was once detailed to the White House filed a whistle-blower complaint on Mr. Trump’s interactions with Mr. Zelensky. Read the complaint.Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced in September that the House would open a formal impeachment proceeding in response to the whistle-blower’s complaint. Here’s how the impeachment process works and here’s why political influence in foreign policy matters.House committees have issued subpoenas to the White House, the Defense Department, the budget office and other agencies for documents related to the impeachment investigation. Here’s the evidence that has been collected so far. Advertisement