https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/14/health/vaping-e-cigarettes-fda.html
E-Cigarettes Went Unchecked in 10 Years of Federal Inaction - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
41
AdvertisementSupported byA decade after Congress gave the F.D.A. the power to regulate tobacco products like e-cigarettes, the federal government has repeatedly delayed or weakened efforts that could have protected teenagers. By Katie Thomas and Sheila KaplanIn 2009, not long after Dr. Margaret Hamburg became commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, a package arrived at her home. Inside was a clunky device called an e-cigarette.“It was my first exposure to this emerging, new technology,” Dr. Hamburg recalled.The package was sent by an antismoking activist as a warning about a product that was taking off in the United States. But over the next decade, the federal government — across the span of two presidential administrations — allowed the rise of a largely unregulated industry that may be addicting a new generation to nicotine.E-cigarettes and vaping devices, with $7 billion in annual sales, have become a part of daily life for millions of Americans. Youth use has skyrocketed with the proliferation of flavors targeting teenagers, such as Bazooka Joe Bubble Gum and Zombie Blood. And nearly 1,300 people have been sickened by mysterious vaping-related lung injuries this year.Yet the agency has not vetted the vast majority of vaping devices or flavored liquids for safety.In dozens of interviews, federal officials and public health experts described a lost decade of inaction, blaming an intense lobbying effort by the e-cigarette and tobacco industries, fears of a political backlash in tobacco-friendly states, bureaucratic delays, and a late reprieve by an F.D.A. commissioner who had previously served on the board of a chain of vaping lounges.“The minute you saw cotton candy flavors — come on,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, who had warned since 2013 of the harms to adolescents. “Everything that could have been done should have been done to get them off the market.”Dr. Hamburg’s F.D.A. suffered an early setback after two e-cigarette companies successfully sued the agency in 2009 for trying to regulate the products as drugs. The F.D.A. was forced instead to treat them as tobacco products under the newly passed Tobacco Control Act, which had less-stringent safety requirements.The agency then spent five years trying to issue regulations that would survive further legal as well as political scrutiny by a White House that had other priorities, including rolling out the Affordable Care Act.Then, in President Obama’s last year, the administration rejected a proposal to ban flavored e-cigarettes. It came in the face of fierce lobbying over the tobacco regulations, including by a former senator and by a onetime White House analyst who had represented the Obama administration in the same discussions a year earlier.[DEEPENING MYSTERY How one man who tried e-cigarettes to stop smoking died of vaping-related illness.]In 2017, President Trump’s F.D.A. commissioner, Dr. Scott Gottlieb, granted e-cigarette companies a reprieve of four years before they would have to prove that the public health benefits of their products outweighed the risks. That extension — which Dr. Frieden described as “public health malpractice” — left the door wide open for the surge in popularity of devices such as those made by Juul Labs, the troubled company that now dominates the market.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: From the moment that Juul was created, it told federal regulators that its product would save lives. Those regulators were eager to believe it. Part 2 in our series on the promise and the peril of vaping.It’s Wednesday, October 30.Sheila, where does the story of Juul begin?The story starts in around 2007, on the beautiful palm tree-lined campus of Stanford University, where two design students, James Monsees and Adam Bowen, are trying to figure out how to stop smoking.Sheila Kaplan has been investigating Juul for The Times.The problem is that products that are available for smokers to quit — the nicotine patch or gum — often don’t work. A lot of smokers don’t like them. So they wanted to come up with a new alternative for health-conscious smokers.And they came up with this very slick new e-cigarette. And it’s basically a heating unit. And you add in a liquid nicotine flavor pod into the unit. And when it’s heated, it gives off a vapor that you can draw into your lungs and get your nicotine fix.Mm-hmm. Hence the term vape.Yes. And it’s very small. It looks like a flash drive. You charge it up on your computer. It’s tiny. It’s portable. It looked like it was designed by Apple. They wanted their product to disrupt the industry. And in 2017, after a few fits and starts, they launched Juul Labs.So their target audience is, kind of like themselves, smokers who want to quit.Right. But they can’t say that on the box. And the reason they can’t is because the F.D.A. doesn’t permit them to make health claims for the product yet. Juul hasn’t been studied by the F.D.A. Juul hasn’t submitted evidence yet to show that it’s safer than cigarettes. And until then, Juul has to be very, very careful about its wording. Juul can’t make claims that the product will help people quit. It’s not approved as a smoking cessation device. They can’t even say that it’s safer, although they imply it. But the F.D.A. seemed very excited about Juul and the other e-cigarettes. And in July of 2017, they said they were going to give Juul and the other companies five extra years to prove their health claims. In the meantime, the F.D.A. allows them all to stay in the stores. So there’s a sense that the agency has been very friendly to the vaping industry.And Sheila, what did that suggest to you?I think they looked at the product and thought, we still have questions about how it will work. But for the first time, there was a product that smokers might actually enjoy instead of smoking.And if you’re the F.D.A., that seems like a pretty good thing.Yeah. If you’re the F.D.A., that’s great news. The F.D.A. says again and again that smoking cigarettes is the greatest preventable cause of death in the U.S. And they have been trying so many different things to try to get people to stop. And this was something that even looked a little glamorous. Maybe it would work.So with this implicit support of the F.D.A., I assume that Juul is leaping headlong into this market of smokers who want to quit.Well, no, actually. Publicly, Juul is saying that they wanted to be an alternative for smokers. But the advertising and the social media is really all about how cool Juul is.And what does that effort look like?Well, Juul takes on a very creative Silicon Valley-like ad campaign, ads that had attractive young people vaping in glamorous settings, at the beach, at concerts. They have influencers on Instagram and Facebook who were beautiful and in love and vaping together. Juul gets movie stars to vape their products.Oh, my vape pen?You’ve got Dave Chappelle —You want to hit my vape pen? [CHEERING]Awkwafina —I found out about Juul very early in the process.Leonardo DiCaprio —At this year’s Golden Globes, Leonardo DiCaprio was spotted vaping.But beyond that, Juul is trying to develop word of mouth. So they go around all over California — they have this overnight pajama party in a Hollywood cemetery where they give everybody free Juuls.Cemetery?Yeah, yeah. I’m not sure I understand the symbolism there. [LAUGHTER] But none of these ads talk about quitting. The movie stars who were photographed vaping just look extremely cool.So how does all of this marketing work for Juul?It worked great. They went from being a company nobody had heard of, selling a product nobody even knew there was a market for, to owning the entire category. They went from $200 million in sales in 2017 to $1.3 billion the following year.Wow.The product became another word for vaping, because people say “Juuling.”So without question, they’re the number one vaping company out there?Yes, but that’s really just a small part of the story.What’s up, guys? As you can see in the title, we’re going to be doing a review on the Juul.This is a super popular vape. And we’re just going to take some rips. We’re going to get some nice nicotine buzz going.Yo. Welcome back to another video. Today, I’m going to tell you how to sneak your Juul to school.It was around then, in the summer of 2018, that lots of reporters were coming over to me and saying that their kids were using this new, teeny little device called a Juul. And what on earth is it? And should we be worried?And what did you say?I said I had no idea, but I would look into it. And then, all of a sudden, in September 2018, this big bomb drops for Juul.Well, there’s a new federal survey based on —The F.D.A. releases its annual teen smoking survey.Twice as many high school students are using e-cigarettes compared to last year. It is the biggest one-year increase in the 44-year history of that study.And most of the teens vaping are kids who never smoked cigarettes.The F.D.A. says there were 2 million middle school- and high school-aged students using e-cigarettes last year. And it’s estimated Juul has about 70 percent of the market share.And most of the teens were using Juul.Hmm. And the question, of course, is what makes Juul so appealing to kids?Well, it seems that it’s a cool new thing. It’s kind of expensive. So it becomes sort of a status symbol to have one. And beyond that, it comes in kid-friendly flavors.Like what?Mango, watermelon, crème brûlée and menthol, among others.And when you say kid-friendly, the assumption here is that an older person trying to quit smoking is not going to be vaping with crème brûlée-flavored Juuls?Well, that’s what most of the public health advocates say. To be fair, Juul says that older people who are trying to quit do like the dessert flavors and the fruit flavors. But they are also very, very appealing to kids. And so the F.D.A., which had been a friend to Juul and had given Juul and the other e-cigarette makers more time to establish themselves before being regulated, realizes they have made an enormous mistake. And the F.D.A. very quickly decided they had to take action. They went to Juul and said, O.K., guys, you’ve got 30 days to show us a plan explaining how on earth you’re going to keep the products away from kids. If you can’t do that, we’re going to take you off the market. For Juul, this is an extinction-level event.In the face of massive government pressure, e-cigarette company Juul will no longer sell some of its product on store shelves.First, Juul announces that they’re going to take their flavored pods out of stores and limit their sales only to online purchases with strict age verification.The company has long maintained they launched the flavors to help adults switch from regular cigarettes and don’t want kids to use their product.They didn’t change the flavors, but they changed the names. So fruit punch became fruit. Crème brûlée became crème. Cool cucumber lost its coolness and just became cucumber. And they promised not to use young people, or those who looked young, in their ads. And finally, they launched this ad campaign: Make the switch.My name is Stacy. I’m 52 years old.It features testimonials from smokers who have quit —I was a pack-a-day smoker for 33 years.— and how much better they feel.I really took a hit from people’s reactions to the fact that I was a smoker. Since I switched to Juul —They are just trying to position themselves as a product now strictly for smokers who want to switch.It’s like a weight lifted off of you.This sounds like the genuine reaction of a company pretty freaked out about the consequences of not meeting the F.D.A.‘s requirements here, either because they might go out of business or because they are genuinely alarmed by the patterns that they’re seeing out there — or, I guess, a combination of the two.Yes. But it turns out that they also had this other motivation. They were trying to sell a huge chunk of their business to, of all people, a tobacco company. Not just any tobacco company, but Altria, the parent company of Philip Morris, the folks who brought you the Marlboro Man, the folks who they had said were their enemy. They touted themselves as the anti-tobacco company. And it turns out that while they were making their public relations campaign to stave off F.D.A. action, they were secretly talking to the tobacco companies.I happened to have been talking to a Juul consultant when the rumor came out that Juul was in discussions with Altria. And the consultant was stunned and said, oh, boy. How are we going to deal with this?We’ll be right back.Sheila, from everything you’ve said, Juul’s founders got into the e-cigarette business because they wanted to help people quit smoking cigarettes. So why would they want to enter into a partnership with Altria, one of the biggest cigarette brands in the world?Altria has a lot of money and a lot of savvy. You have to remember Juul was in tremendous trouble at this point. I think Juul thought, well, public opinion about us can’t get any lower. So why not connect with Altria? Take their money, take their expertise, take their lobbyists, and then try to build up from there?So Sheila, what happens with this deal?In December 2018, Altria purchased a 35 percent stake in Juul —Altria, the company that owns Marlboro, is investing nearly $13 billion into Juul —— for nearly $13 billion.That’s a lot of money.It’s a lot of money. And Juul immediately used much of it to give bonuses to its employees —The investment makes two Stanford students who created Juul multibillionaires and will reportedly pay its 1,500 employees a bonus of more than $1 million each.— thereby making sure that people who did not want to work for a tobacco company thought twice before leaving.And what does this deal end up meaning for Juul as a business?Well, they’re still in a lot of trouble with the F.D.A. But now they have Altria’s political clout to help them. And Juul’s sales are up. So they’re doing very well in the marketplace. But what they didn’t expect, and what nobody expected, was —A medical mystery spreading across the country tonight.— all over the country, people would start getting very sick.It started in the late spring.The Minnesota Department of Health has issued an alert after four teenagers got seriously ill.The first reports came out of the Midwest.One hospital in Wisconsin reported it has seen eight teenagers with seriously damaged lungs and —Mostly young people being rushed to the hospital, unable to breathe.— presented with shortness of breath, with cough, with fever.Quite a few of them, within 24 hours, could barely breathe at all. And they were put on ventilators.— some of which have been hospitalized in our intensive care unit and have required significant therapy to help them breathe.It was horrible.They go from healthy adolescents to really in a life-threatening situation.Pretty quickly, within about six weeks —The C.D.C. is looking into dozens of cases. The C.D.C. can confirm 31 cases — 200 potential cases — 380 cases — The 450 cases spanned 33 states.There are hundreds and hundreds of cases around the country. And then —An adult in Illinois died from an unexplained pulmonary illness.— people started to die.A fourth death has been reported from a severe lung illness.That brings to six the total number of deaths across the United States.As the mystery deepens, the search for answers continues.And nobody knew what was causing it. The doctors were baffled why young, otherwise healthy people were getting so sick. Is it an infectious disease? Is it some weird virus they had never heard of? And then what some of the doctors realized was that the one thing all the patients had in common —[INTERPOSING VOICES] Vaping.— they had all been vaping.But what complicated the situation and made it more of a mystery is that everybody seemed to be vaping something different. And in Washington, some of the pro-vaping groups, with the exception of Juul, are saying, you know what? Everybody’s who’s sick has been vaping pot. This is not nicotine. Nicotine vaping is safe. It’s not our products.And why doesn’t Juul join in making that claim?Because at this point, Juul is already in so much trouble that while they are pretty confident that their products aren’t hurting people, they really don’t know. Juul is just trying to be super cautious at this point. And that turns out to be a pretty smart move, because even though most of the cases seem to be associated with vaping pot, there are a number of cases where people got sick and even died.He wasn’t breathing very often. And his last breath I could tell because there was just a slight twitch in his neck.And their survivors say they only vaped nicotine.Do you know which brand?Mistics.Then he had blu, and then he went to Juul.And he only went to Juul less than a year ago.So what does Juul do as suspicion starts to grow that perhaps the business that they are in may be making people sick?Well, for once, Juul tries to get out front of a problem.Only on CBS This Morning, the C.E.O. of Juul Labs is defending his company’s reputation.The C.E.O., Kevin Burns, goes on national TV and tells people he believes that Juul does not present a risk.We think we have a product that does not present a risk based on the guidelines of the category today to the American public.But he also says that the long-term effects are not known.That’s true. That’s a true statement.And then he really surprises listeners by saying —Don’t vape. Don’t use Juul.Don’t use Juul if you’re not a smoker.Don’t start using nicotine if you don’t have a pre-existing relationship with nicotine. Don’t use the product.Wow. So what ends up happening?In early September, C.D.C. makes a public announcement.The C.D.C. and several medical groups now warning the public to stop vaping immediately.Everybody should stop vaping while we’re figuring this out. And then something else happens, which is that the new numbers come in from the Youth Tobacco Survey. And youth vaping is continuing to rise.The most recent data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey showed that 27 and a half percent of youths reported using e-cigarettes, compared with 20.8 in 2018.Now it’s up to 5 million teens who say they’ve vaped recently. So you’ve got this outbreak of a lung illness. And then in the midst of that, more kids are using e-cigarettes than ever. So —We have a problem in our country. It’s a new problem. It’s a problem nobody really thought about too much —President Trump makes this announcement.— a few years ago. And it’s called vaping, especially vaping as it pertains to innocent children. And they’re coming home, and they’re saying, Mom, I want to vape.Next to him is the secretary of health and human services, Alex Azar.The Food and Drug Administration intends to require that all flavors other than tobacco flavor would be removed from the market.And he says, we are going to ban all flavored e-cigarettes.Which are the most popular among young people.Right, and which makes up about 80 percent of Juul’s sales.So this feels like yet another pretty much existential crisis for Juul. How do they respond to it?Juul stops pretending things are O.K.Juul Labs U.S.A. announced there will be no more ads.They stop all their ads. And they kick out their C.E.O.Juul announced a new C.E.O., a former tobacco executive.And they replace him with a more experienced tobacco executive straight from Altria. They’re now doing everything they can, because they know that at any time, given everything that’s happened, the government could yank them off the shelves and say, game over.Just basically ban the sale of any Juul anywhere.Right. That’s their fear. Juul is waiting to learn if health officials will say that their product has contributed to this horrible lung disease outbreak. And they’re also waiting to see if the F.D.A. will let them stay on the market, given the growing number of kids who are vaping their product.If Juul’s products, Sheila, eventually are pulled from the shelves, I wonder where that leaves these millions of people who took up vaping. Maybe they gave up smoking to use Juul, or they picked up Juul having never smoked and are now very much dependent on it. What happens to them? What do they do?Well, some of the industry analysts do predict that there will be a mass shifting to regular old cancer-causing cigarettes.That would be a very perverse outcome of this experiment in creating an entire industry that was supposed to get people to stop smoking.Yeah. But guess who would be totally fine with that? Altria, which spent $13 billion for a stake in Juul. Because guess what their main business still is? Cigarettes.Sheila, looking back at all this, the story that you have just told us, it’s hard not to think about how federal regulators approached Juul from the start. Did regulators just behave too credulously here? Were they too willing to buy into Juul’s story of itself and not do enough of their own due diligence?It does seem that, in retrospect, the regulators were fooled. They really wanted to offer the public an alternative to smoking. Smoking is still the biggest public health problem in the country. And I know that the folks at the F.D.A. believe that if they could offer safer alternatives, they could save lives. This could be the biggest public health gain ever in the U.S. And it does seem that they didn’t ask enough questions, that they were too quick to believe what they wanted to believe, that innovation could solve this intractable problem. And if you talk to them now, they know they were wrong. And it’s very sad.Sheila, thank you very much. We appreciate it.My pleasure.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today. On Tuesday, the National Security Council’s top expert on Ukraine, Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, told House impeachment investigators that the White House transcript of the call between President Trump and the president of Ukraine omitted crucial words and phrases, and that his attempts to restore them had failed. The omissions included references to former Vice President Joe Biden and to the Ukrainian company that employed Biden’s son, raising more questions about how records of the call were handled by the White House. That call has since become central to the impeachment inquiry. And —Boeing came to my office shortly after these crashes and said they were the result of pilot error. Those pilots never had a chance. These loved ones never had a chance. They were in flying coffins as a result of Boeing deciding that it was going to conceal MCAS from the pilot.During a tense congressional hearing, senators demanded an explanation from the chief executive of Boeing about the company’s handling of flight control software blamed for two crashes that killed 346 passengers. The chief executive, Dennis Muilenburg, acknowledged that he learned about pilots’ concerns about the software, known as MCAS, after the first crash, but did not take action until after a second crash involving the same software.On behalf of myself and the Boeing company, we are sorry — deeply and truly sorry. As a husband and father myself, I’m heartbroken by your losses. I think about you and your loved ones every day, and I know our entire Boeing team does as well.In his testimony, Muilenburg said that Boeing had made mistakes and apologized to the families of those who died in the crashes, some of whom were in the audience.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Meanwhile, the federal government has largely ignored the explosion in vaping THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, which coincided with either recreational or medicinal legalization in many states. That regulatory dead zone has left public health officials scrambling to track the cause of the vaping-related lung illnesses that have led to at least 29 deaths.Dr. Ned Sharpless, the acting F.D.A. commissioner, recently acknowledged in a congressional hearing that the agency should have acted sooner. “We’re going to catch up,” he promised.Last month — facing rising rates of teen vaping and alarm over the lung illnesses — administration officials announced they would finally impose a flavor ban for e-cigarettes. But the ban has yet to materialize, and industry groups have been fighting it, especially any limits on menthol and mint. As of Oct. 30, there have been 1,604 vaping illnesses and 36 deaths. More maps and charts.Cases of lung illnessDeaths0105010015a0Mont.Minn.Ore.Mass.Wis.Mich.N.Y.Conn.Pa.Neb.Ind.N.J.Ill.UtahDel.Kan.Mo.Calif.Va.Tenn.Ala.Ga.D.C.Miss.Tex.Fla.VirginIslandsCases of vaping-related lung illnessDeaths01050100150Mont.Minn.Ore.Mass.Wis.N.Y.Mich.Conn.Pa.Neb.Ind.N.J.Ill.UtahDel.Kan.Mo.Calif.Va.Tenn.Ala.Ga.Miss.D.C.Tex.Fla.VirginIslandsCases of vaping-related lung illnessVaping-related deaths01050100150Mont.Minn.Ore.Mass.Mich.Wis.N.Y.Conn.Pa.N.J.Neb.Ind.Ill.UtahDel.Calif.Mo.Va.Kan.Tenn.Ga.Ala.Miss.D.C.Tex.Fla.VirginIslandsHawaiiBy The New York Times | Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state agenciesEven bigger changes to the e-cigarette industry might be on the way. That deadline Dr. Gottlieb extended has been overturned by a judge, who ordered the F.D.A. to require e-cigarette companies to apply for approval by May, and to submit evidence their products do more good than harm. Last week, Reynolds American began the process, filing its application with the F.D.A. for VUSE, the company’s cartridge-based vaping system that features flavors such as mixed berry, tropical, menthol and others.Vaping manufacturers and retailers have opposed more regulations, saying smokers need access to a potentially safer alternative, given that traditional cigarettes kill hundreds of thousands of Americans a year. “We think that harm reduction, and the potential of harm reduction, for these products cannot be dismissed,” said Brittani Cushman, the board president of the Vapor Technology Association, an industry trade group.But some public health officials say they doubt Juul and other companies will be able to surmount the regulatory hurdle if teenage use keeps climbing. The F.D.A.’s lack of action has baffled some families of those who have fallen ill, including Ruby Johnson of Illinois, whose 18-year-old daughter, Piper, nearly died after vaping nicotine and THC.“If this was romaine lettuce, the shelves would be empty,” she told a House panel last month.The earliest forms of e-cigarettes arrived in the United States market in 2007 and sought to mimic the smoking experience. The products intrigued many public health experts, who hoped they would wean people off traditional tobacco. They didn’t contain the harmful byproducts and chemicals of cigarettes, although there was little evidence that they were safe.The F.D.A. was wary. In 2009, the agency declared that the e-cigarettes were illegal drug-device combinations — like a nicotine patch — that had not been approved. The F.D.A. halted imports and warned that they contained toxic chemicals and appealed to young people with flavors like chocolate and mint. E-cigarette companies sued, setting up the first major court fight over vaping nicotine. The court’s ruling in favor of the industry in 2010 “set the agency back significantly,” said Dr. Joshua M. Sharfstein, who was then the deputy director of the F.D.A. and who left in 2011. The agency’s loss was a harsh reminder of the tobacco industry’s staying power. “It can be very hard for a regulator to address potential risks when there is an aggressive industry on the other side,” he said.Over the next several years, as the agency slowly developed regulations to oversee all types of tobacco items, including cigars, vaping devices and liquids, “the market became flooded with products that Congress never intended to be on the market at all without F.D.A. review,” said Gregg Haifley, director of federal relations at the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network. Vape shops became commonplace, and users experimented with thousands of flavors that were often mixed on store premises or at home. One of the tobacco industry’s fiercest critics, Senator Jeff Merkley, Democrat of Oregon, had urged the agency beginning in 2009 to rein in nicotine vaping products, and mentioned allies like Mitchell Zeller, who oversees tobacco at the F.D.A., and who was among the early advocates for a ban on flavors. Dr. Hamburg, who left the F.D.A. in 2015, said the agency struggled to move quickly to issue the broad regulation for e-cigarettes as well as other tobacco products, including cigars. It was a complex process, she said, given previous court challenges. “For something so important for health, the delays at H.H.S. and the White House were distressing and confusing — people were getting very frustrated,” she said, and given the expanding industry, “I wanted to get it out, from a reputational point of view and from a morale point of view for F.D.A.”At the time, the Obama White House and the Department of Health and Human Services were also dealing with mounting Republican opposition to the administration’s signature health care law, the Affordable Care Act, which was passed in 2010 and went into effect in 2014 with an exceptionally bumpy rollout. Several states have announced e-cigarette bans in response to recent vaping illnesses and deaths. More maps and charts.Wash.Mont.Mass.Ore.Mich.N.Y.R.I.ChicagoPine RidgeReservationS.F.UtahIll.The TrumpadministrationLos AngelesConsidering or working on a banAnnounced or enacted ban on flavored e-cigarettesAnnounced or enacted ban on all e-cigarettesFour-month ban on all vaping productsWash.Mont.Ore.Mass.Mich.N.Y.S.D.R.I.Calif.ChicagoPine RidgeReservationIll.UtahSan FranciscoThe TrumpadministrationLos AngelesConsidering or working on a banAnnounced or enacted ban on flavored e-cigarettesAnnounced or enacted ban on all e-cigarettesFour-month ban on all vaping productsWash.Mont.Ore.Mass.S.D.N.Y.Mich.R.I.Pine RidgeReservationChicagoSan FranciscoIll.UtahThe TrumpadministrationCalif.Los AngelesConsidering or working on a banAnnounced or enacted ban on flavored e-cigarettesAnnounced or enacted ban on all e-cigarettesFour-month ban on all vaping productsBy The New York TimesIn 2015, the agency finally sent its proposed rule — for oversight of all e-cigarettes and tobacco products — to the Office of Management and Budget for final approval.Over that fall and winter, the tobacco and e-cigarette industries made a major push to weaken the regulations, enlisting people like former Senator Mary Landrieu, Democrat of Louisiana, to lobby the Obama administration.The tobacco and e-cigarette industries overlapped considerably — major tobacco companies like Reynolds American had begun selling their own e-cigarette products as they sought to replace revenues lost from declining smoking rates. And the nicotine liquids used in vaping are derived from tobacco leaves.Altria, the nation’s largest tobacco company, threw its weight against a flavor ban. In comments to the F.D.A. on Aug. 8, 2014, it contended that restriction could result in more illicit sales, and that adults also liked fruity and sweet e-cigarette flavors.In Congress, the tobacco industry lobbied hard against the proposals, using its pull as a major donor to get Republicans and some Democrats to sign on to industry-friendly bills. And at the Office of Management and Budget, officials hosted dozens of meetings, mostly with industry groups weighing in on the F.D.A.’s 468-page proposal. Some visits were held back to back, with dozens of people — from vape shop owners worried about the economic impact, to product distributors, to public health experts who favored the restrictions — attending the meetings, according to White House records. “This country is run off the backbone of small business,” read a statement from one entrepreneur, Wade Jordan, who owned vape shops in Bedford, Texas.One frequent visitor was a familiar face — Andrew Perraut, a former policy analyst who had left the federal budget office in 2014. Federal records show that he represented the budget office in a meeting in April 2014 with Cigar Rights of America, a premium cigar lobbying group. A little over a year later, in late 2015, Mr. Perraut was back, but this time as a representative of Cigar Rights of America and others, including the e-cigarette company NJoy. Mr. Perraut, now director of public policy at Juul, declined to comment through a Juul spokesman.When the White House returned the final rule to the F.D.A. in 2016, language for a ban on flavors had been crossed out. Shaun Donovan, the director of the budget agency, and other Obama administration officials, including Kathleen Sebelius and Sylvia Mathews Burwell, both of whom served as secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services during that period, declined to comment. Dr. Robert M. Califf, who had supervised policy on tobacco products at the F.D.A. before becoming commissioner in 2016, said he did not know why the flavor ban had been deleted. However, “I’m sure the small business impact had something to do with it,” he said. Dr. Hamburg, who had left by then, also said she did not know why it had been deleted.Some former Obama administration officials said the White House considered the flavor ban too restrictive and that there was no solid evidence that flavored e-cigarettes were harmful. In addition, it would have extended to products like cigars, which was opposed by the industry, as was regulation of premium cigars, which threatened Democrats in tobacco-friendly states like North Carolina and Florida.One former Obama administration health official, who asked not to be identified because it could jeopardize his employment as a lobbyist, said the political risk for banning flavors seemed too high, given Republican control of Congress. The White House was worried about several Republican proposals that aimed to unravel the F.D.A.’s ability to regulate tobacco products. “We were very nervous about what would happen if we did this,” the former official said. “Would the Obama ‘nanny state’ criticism come in to play? Not all Senate Democrats were strong champions of those things. There had to be give.”The rule approved by the White House did set new requirements for the industry, including forbidding sales to minors and mandating the submission of ingredient lists by e-cigarette manufacturers. In 2017, the vaping landscape shifted again with Mr. Trump’s appointment of Dr. Gottlieb, who had served on the board of Kure, a chain of vaping lounges. Although he divested from Kure when he became the F.D.A. commissioner, Dr. Gottlieb held on to the idea that vaping could help adults quit smoking. Two months into his new job, he handed the e-cigarette industry the breathing room of a four-year extension to comply with the new rules as part of a broader package that appeared to straddle competing interests. He called for lowering nicotine in cigarettes to render them less addictive, while ensuring access to e-cigarettes and other alternatives for smokers trying to quit. Then, in 2018, new federal survey data showed that teen vaping had jumped sharply in the past year, driven by the popularity of Juul, and that more than three million American high school students had tried e-cigarettes.“It was just a horror show,” said Katy Talento, a former top health policy adviser to Mr. Trump on the Domestic Policy Council. After that, she said, “the calculus changed.” In an interview, Dr. Gottlieb said he then began lobbying the White House and lawmakers to win support for an e-cigarette crackdown.“I couldn’t outright ban the sale of e-cigarettes in convenience stores, because the law prohibited me from doing that,” he said. “And that’s where the kids were accessing the products.”The agency issued warning letters to companies that sold products that appealed to youth, and began an investigation into whether Juul had illegally marketed to young people and marketed products as smoking cessation devices.In November 2018, Juul responded by discontinuing sales of most of its flavors to retail shops, with the exception of mint and menthol.But Juul also brought its lobbyists to the White House numerous times, to argue that restrictions would hurt cigarette smokers who wanted to quit.  “I had to work harder to make the arguments,” Dr. Gottlieb said. “I spilled a lot of blood on this issue.”Last fall, Juul dispatched the lobbyist Tevi Troy, a former Bush administration health official, and others to make the company’s case at the White House, and tried to temper outrage over whether it had played a role in the rise of youth vaping. Ms. Talento, the former Trump health adviser, said a generational split became apparent between younger White House health staff members who did not have teenagers, and “the uncool 40-somethings” — like her — who did. “We were like, ‘It’s not working,’” she said. “They may have expected a warmer reception,” she said of Juul’s team. Several federal and state inquiries into its marketing practices have put Juul on the defensive, and it is leaning more heavily on the regulatory expertise of Altria, which has a 35 percent stake in the company. Last month, Juul replaced its chief executive Kevin Burns with a top Altria executive, K.C. Crosthwaite. It has dropped its biggest marketing campaign and said it would discontinue its efforts to overturn an e-cigarette ban in San Francisco. Soon after Juul stopped stocking retail shelves with its flavor pods, the F.D.A. announced it would require retailers to wall off such e-cigarette products from minors — a watered-down version of more severe actions threatened by Dr. Gottlieb. But those plans have drawn considerable opposition from retailers, conservative groups and businesses.Last month, after Dr. Sharpless and Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services, told White House officials that new figures showed teen vaping had increased again, they said they would draft the proposed ban on most flavored e-cigarettes. “We can’t allow people to get sick,” the president said, with his wife Melania at his side in the Oval Office. “And we can’t have our youth be so affected.”Mr. Trump recently tweeted that he liked “the vaping alternative to cigarettes” but wanted to keep young children from using the products. Some states and cities have stepped in. Massachusetts has halted sales of all vaping products for four months, and other states, including Michigan, Rhode Island, Washington, Oregon and New York, have imposed flavor bans or taken steps to do so. And several major retailers, including Walmart, Walgreens and others, have said they would stop selling e-cigarettes altogether. Efforts to track the cause of the lung illnesses have been hampered by the fact that THC-based products largely fall into a regulatory vacuum, and relaxed laws in many states have enabled an illicit trade. While marijuana is still illegal at the federal level, nearly three dozen states permit medicinal use, and 11 states and the District of Columbia have fully legalized it.The F.D.A.’s authority over THC is considered a gray area of law. A handful of cannabis-derived drugs have been approved, and the F.D.A. is talking to other agencies about expanding its reach.Nearly 1,300 people, disproportionately young, have been sickened from vaping THC, nicotine or both. At least 29 have died.It often takes a public health crisis for the federal government to enact major change, said Dr. Califf, the former F.D.A. commissioner. “It has to get bad enough before you can actually get down to what needs to get done,” he said. “And I guess in a way this is an example.”Julie Creswell contributed reporting.[Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.]Advertisement