https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/17/us/politics/mick-mulvaney-trump-ukraine.html
Mulvaney Says, Then Denies, That Trump Held Back Ukraine Aid as Quid Pro Quo - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
55
AdvertisementSupported byConflicting comments by the acting White House chief of staff threw Washington into turmoil. By Michael D. Shear and Katie RogersWASHINGTON — Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, threw the Trump administration’s defense against impeachment into disarray on Thursday when he said that the White House withheld nearly $400 million in military aid to Ukraine to further President Trump’s political interests.Mr. Mulvaney told journalists in a televised White House briefing that the aid was withheld in part until Ukraine investigated an unsubstantiated theory that Ukraine, not Russia, was responsible for hacking Democratic Party emails in 2016 — a theory that would show that Mr. Trump was elected without Russian help.The declaration by Mr. Mulvaney, which he took back later in the day, undercut Mr. Trump’s repeated denials of a quid pro quo that linked American military aid for Ukraine to an investigation that could help Mr. Trump politically.[What is a quid pro quo? Here’s how the phrase has been used in past legal contexts.]The comments sent Washington into turmoil as Democrats and some Republicans said they were deeply damaging to Mr. Trump. At the White House, Mr. Mulvaney said that Mr. Trump had demanded that Ukraine investigate the theory, even though a former White House homeland security adviser had told Mr. Trump that the theory had been completely debunked. “The look back to what happened in 2016 certainly was part of the thing that he was worried about in corruption with that nation,” Mr. Mulvaney told reporters, referring to Mr. Trump. “And that is absolutely appropriate.”Mr. Mulvaney’s acknowledgment of a tie between military aid and a political investigation came as House Democrats were summoning a stream of witnesses to the Capitol to investigate whether Mr. Trump had pressured Ukraine for his personal political benefit in 2020. Democrats called Mr. Mulvaney’s comments a potential turning point in their impeachment inquiry. “We have a confession,” said Representative Eric Swalwell, Democrat of California.By day’s end, after Mr. Trump told aides to clean up the mess, Mr. Mulvaney issued a statement flatly denying what he had earlier said. “Once again, the media has decided to misconstrue my comments to advance a biased and political witch hunt against President Trump,” Mr. Mulvaney wrote. “Let me be clear, there was absolutely no quid pro quo between Ukrainian military aid and any investigation into the 2016 election. The president never told me to withhold any money until the Ukrainians did anything related to the server.”But in his earlier remarks to reporters, Mr. Mulvaney pointed to “three issues” that explained why officials withheld the aid: corruption in Ukraine, frustration that European governments were not providing more money to Ukraine and the president’s demand that Kiev officials investigate the issue of the Democratic National Committee server.“Did he also mention to me in passing the corruption related to the D.N.C. server?” Mr. Mulvaney said, referring to Mr. Trump. “Absolutely. No question about that.” He added, “That’s why we held up the money.”Democrats ridiculed the reversal.“Mick Mulvaney was either lying then, or he’s lying now,” said Representative Ted Lieu, a California Democrat involved in the inquiry. “I think he’s lying now.”At the White House, staff members recognized that Mr. Mulvaney had created an entirely new controversy with his remarks. Jay Sekulow, one of Mr. Trump’s personal lawyers, said Thursday, “The president’s legal counsel was not involved in acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney’s press briefing.”Mr. Mulvaney’s performance was only part of another extraordinary day in Mr. Trump’s presidency. Mr. Mulvaney made his remarks after he stepped before the cameras to announce that the leaders of the Group of 7 nations would meet in June at Mr. Trump’s golf resort in South Florida, even as he acknowledged the choice could be seen as self-enrichment. In Texas, Mr. Trump hailed a Middle East cease-fire that would cement Turkey’s goal of pushing Kurds from Northern Syria as “a great day for civilization.”And on Capitol Hill, Gordon D. Sondland, the president’s ambassador to the European Union and a wealthy donor to Mr. Trump’s campaign, was implicating the president in the Ukraine scandal by telling lawmakers that Mr. Trump had delegated Ukraine policy to his personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani.Mr. Sondland testified behind closed doors for more than six hours, the latest in a series of current and former diplomats and White House aides who have provided detailed accounts of actions by Mr. Giuliani and others related to Ukraine.Democratic lawmakers are certain to seize on Mr. Mulvaney’s comments as crucial support of the testimony coming from other witnesses, who have accused the administration of improperly pressuring Ukraine and of sidelining veteran diplomats in favor of Mr. Trump’s political loyalists.transcriptThere he is.I was not warned about the wind.Good morning.Hi.Hi!Sondland is testifying as we speak.This is a big day.Hey, we’re here to get press credentials? We’re from The New York Times.All right. We’re in the House.So we’re in a — oh, watch out, people are coming. The House speaker is walking by with a very significant entourage. That was Nancy Pelosi. That was cool.O.K. So what are we doing? Oh, we’re waiting for Nick to get off the phone.We also could say hi.I have a croissant I’d like to finish.From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Are you going to bring him in for a deposition?Today —Nothing further at this moment.Does this move the ball for impeachment, in your mind?A week inside the U.S. Capitol as the impeachment inquiry enters a pivotal phase.It’s Friday, October 18.There’s a bunch of rooms, so —O.K.What’s going on?We’re just trying to find a room that is quiet enough to make an episode of “The Daily.”I think this will work.O.K. Here we go. Nick Fandos, you’ve been on the Hill all week. Walk me through this. What does the impeachment inquiry actually look like on the ground?Yeah. So, I mean, the crazy thing is that the house opened this impeachment inquiry a little more than three weeks ago now on their way out of town for a two-week recess. So members were scattered all over the country, meeting with constituents, holding town halls, while back here in the Capitol, a core group of staff members, basically, for the House Intelligence Committee and a couple of others, stuck around and began issuing subpoenas and requests, setting up the very first witness depositions for their investigation. And so this week was the week that five of those depositions, one a day, were lined up, and lawmakers were going to be coming back. So that’s kind of what I was expecting when I arrived at the Capitol on Monday.Hello.Hey, it’s Nick.Hi, how’s it going?And I met up with our colleagues from “The Daily,” Rachel Quester and Clare Toeniskoetter, who were going to spend the week with me.It’s so nice outside.It’s so nice outside.We had to meet up outside of the Capitol because it was Columbus Day, actually. The press galleries and all the functional staff were not working here. So I had to escort them in specially. We walked inside and down three sets of stairs.Where are we?We’re standing now beside the doors to the House Intelligence Committee SCIF.And at the bottom of those stairs, we end up at the secured rooms, we call it the SCIF, of the House Intelligence Committee —Wait, SCIF? Secure —Compartmentalized Information Facility.— which is one of the most secretive in Congress. It’s where this investigation is taking place, all behind closed doors.And they have these red stickers on them, which get photographed all the time and are always in the newspaper, which just say “restricted area.” You can’t go there.So the three of us and a bunch of reporters were gathered around outside, basically waiting for any emissaries to come out of the room and give some sense of what was going on back there with the very first witness deposition.We spend all day trying to mentally pierce that barrier.So it says something about this week that this room is where Congress is holding these hearings.Yeah, that’s right. I mean, it’s entirely outside of the public view. This is an investigation that could result in an attempt to remove President Trump. And the earliest stages of the investigation, at least, are all being conducted out of public view. And this has been a source of some contention early on.The first two interviews, totalling approximately 20 hours, not one single thing was said in those respective interviews that the American people should not be able to see, should not be able to hear.Republicans have really seized on it to accuse Democrats of, basically, trying to impeach Trump in private —The tragedy here, and the crime here, is that the American people don’t get to see what’s going on in these sessions.— of hiding important work from the American people and from the press, who might be able to evaluate it. And the Democrats argue, though, that basically, this is investigative best practice. That, unlike past impeachments, they don’t already know what the story is. They need to find out the details. And the best way to investigate it is in private, where witnesses can’t line up their stories by hearing what somebody else testified, where lawyers can ask most of the questions, rather than lawmakers who are, maybe, trying to fundraise off of some quip, or speak to their constituents at a public hearing. And this allows them, ideally, to move quickly and collect a lot of information efficiently.And then, they figure out, what have we found? And what is the best of what we’ve got? And they move that, then, into the public sphere. And they present that evidence, they invite their best witnesses to come and testify, and they can kind of control the story that they’re building against the president.Much like a prosecutor, or a district attorney, quietly builds a case, makes an announcement of whether or not there’s an indictment, and then goes to trial.That’s right. The rub, of course, is that this is Congress. And politicians love to blab. They get information that looks damaging to the president. If you’re a Democrat, you’d love for that to get out.So what’s the situation on Monday when it comes to these hearings? What’s actually happening in that SCIF, behind those closed doors?So for most of the day Monday, all I know is that this former White House official, Fiona Hill, is in there testifying.And it’s hour after hour after hour. There’s very little information coming out. My feet are getting sore.Hey. Are you still free?Chit-chatting with other reporters. Basically waiting for any kind of emissary to come out of the room and give us a sense of what’s going on.It seems pretty quiet. I think Schiff just left to go — he’s speaking at the 92nd Street Y.You’re just spending the day standing outside this room.Right.[SIGHS]How many hours do you think you’ve spent standing, waiting, doing nothing so far?I don’t know. Probably north of 30 hours, 35 hours. But it’ll get worse.And it was a long day. And, eventually, the sun goes down. Fiona Hill is still not done. And she finally leaves at about 8 o’clock.Bye, thank you!I just kind of had to go home. Because there was not a whole lot more reporting to do here.Hmm.And it was only as I was walking back up to my apartment building that I started hearing from some sources and being able to piece together, over the next couple of hours, what had actually happened that day. And the testimony, it turns out, was pretty remarkable.What was the testimony?So you’ve got to keep in mind, Fiona Hill is a respected career Russia expert who was brought in to the Trump administration to work for John Bolton on the National Security Council as one of the president’s top advisers on Europe and Russia policy. So she’s right at the center of traditional decision making around policy towards Ukraine. And the account that she gives is that there was a meeting earlier this summer in July where several other diplomats, including Gordon Sondland, a former Trump donor who had become ambassador to the European Union, met with some Ukrainian officials. And she tells lawmakers that this meeting veered dangerously off course, from her perspective, and that she and her boss, John Bolton, were so alarmed by what was said that Bolton told her, you need to go to White House lawyers right now and tell them that we’re not part of, and this was a quote, “whatever drug deal” these guys are cooking up.Wow.Not a literal drug deal. But what Bolton and Hill thought was going on is that Sondland and the president’s private lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, were basically holding out from the Ukrainians a White House meeting with President Trump, which is what they wanted, as leverage for the Ukrainians agreeing to investigate Democrats and Democratic issues that could benefit the president politically. Hill also testified that, at one point, Bolton referred to Giuliani as a “hand grenade” that’s “going to blow everybody up.” And so we were able to basically pull together this and some other elements of the story and publish it, I think, about 10:30 at night, and really be able to tell the story of day one behind those closed doors.So beyond this being a very juicy scoop, what’s the significance of the testimony that Fiona Hill gave? What does it do for the inquiry?So there are a couple things that I would say. One is that she implicates her boss, John Bolton, who is a boldface name in Washington. He’s the president’s top national security adviser. And saying that high up in the chain, the president’s national security adviser is calling this a “drug deal,” was so concerned about this he had me go to the lawyers — and it kind of opened the door to the fact that this set of events that we’re learning about in retrospect were setting off alarms in real time, and at very high levels of the government. The other aspect of it, though, is that I’m looking ahead to the rest of the week, and it seems pretty clear she’s not going to be the last person. Unlike in past investigations, where the White House has successfully shut down Congress, important witnesses are coming, and they’re going to talk, and they’re going to tell their story. We’re actually going to understand what happened here.Nick, I guess I just have, like, a collegial inquiry here. What’s the point of standing around all day if you end up getting the best stuff when you get home at, like, 10 o’clock at night?[LAUGHS]Doesn’t that suggest that maybe you’re not going about this in the most efficient way?Uhh, it’s a fair point.But we do learn some pretty significant details that set the stage for the rest of the week.O.K. So what happens the next day, on Tuesday?Ready for day two.Yeah.So on Tuesday, we know that there is going to be another one of these closed-door depositions that’s probably going to go on again for hours, this time with a senior State Department official who was more or less in charge of Ukraine policy for the State Department.So Julie’s group, we’re going to gather up. Make sure we have everybody. I don’t see Brian.I don’t either.But the first thing that I notice as I arrive at the Capitol is that the place has been transformed overnight.O.K., so Nick just walked away, because he got a call from a member of Congress.After two weeks of recess, lawmakers are back.Madam Speaker, will there be an formal vote on an impeachment inquiry? Madam Speaker?There are even tourists wandering around through the SCIF area, running into reporters.In part to keep an eye on the British.Yeah, it’s somewhere up there. Oh, wait. There we go.Stopping, looking at the TV reporters, who they recognize from CNN.Have you guys heard of the whole impeachment inquiry?Mm-hmm.Yeah. That’s craziness.The press corps seems to have somehow doubled. I don’t know how, because it’s already been huge following this stuff. And there’s just kind of an energy gripping the place that comes with 535 or so lawmakers and their staff, their kind of entourages, being back, moving around the Capitol.Can any member of Congress walk into the SCIF, right by you, and actually listen to these depositions as testimony?The answer is no. And we actually saw it a couple times this week, when Republicans tried to go in and sit in on these depositions. But they were not on the committees that are leading the investigation. And therefore, under the committee rules, they ended up getting kicked out. But with lawmakers back in town, you’re talking about three committees that are leading the impeachment investigation. That’s dozens and dozens of lawmakers that sit on those. And they can all go and sit in. And they can come out, and they’re not supposed to talk in detail about what transpired, but they can give general impressions and hints about what they heard. In one case, one Democrat came out and basically broke the rules and just talked about what was happening completely.How did the questioning go today, Gerry?I thought it was very powerful testimony.And what did this Democrat divulge?So he comes out and says —Here is a senior State Department official responsible for six countries, one of which is Ukraine —— that he’d just heard the witness in the room, a State Department official named George Kent —— who found himself outside of a parallel process that he felt was undermining 28 years of U.S. policy in promoting the rule of law in Ukraine.— that he and other career diplomats who were in charge of the State Department’s policy toward Ukraine had been shoved aside —All of the people charged with policy in Ukraine were replaced, apparently, after a May 23rd meeting at the White House organized by Mick Mulvaney, not John Bolton or Pompeo.— and were told, starting late in the spring, that basically, their services weren’t needed anymore —And that was wrong. He used that word, “wrong.”— that policy towards Ukraine was going to be run by Gordon Sondland, and Rudy Giuliani, and others out of the White House —The import of this testimony is deeply disturbing, especially the role of Rudy Giuliani.— and they may as well lay low.And what’s the significance of that?So the significance of that is that you have here another high-level American diplomat saying that the normal channels for foreign policy that have guided American policy for quite a long time are being stepped on, basically, by the White House, which is putting their own guys in charge. And one of them that he singles out, yet again, is Gordon Sondland. Now you have a second witness, two in two days, coming forward and giving a pretty consistent account.This is all picking up a little bit of momentum.So I’m taking it you didn’t watch the Democratic debate.I did not watch the Democratic debate, and I did not watch playoff baseball.[LAUGHS]What if we take a 20-minute break, and I can go and satisfy my editors a little bit by updating some stories?Yeah. All right. We’ll be back, as we say.O.K. More soon.Thanks, Nick.You guys going to hang here?Yeah.O.K. Should we go to break there?That was the idea.See ya!O.K. So Wednesday.Wednesday. Another day, another diplomat. This time, it’s a senior adviser to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who quit the State Department last week, reportedly because he was so frustrated by the very things that we’re talking about. He tried to raise alarms by that and didn’t get a response. And he was so fed up, he said he quit. So it’s clear after three days of testimony that we’re starting to see the diplomatic and foreign policy core, the expertise, the professional class that handles American foreign policy through Democratic and Republican administrations, basically coming one by one to tell a remarkably consistent story about how, in ways that they were uncomfortable with and they had not seen before, they were getting pushed aside. And the policy that was being executed in their place — they would say it’s not even a policy — but the actions in their place, basically, rather than, to put it in their words, the policy serving the well-being of the Ukrainians and the United States, it was serving the well-being of the president of the United States. And that was about it.But how exactly is that the basis of an impeachment inquiry?So it’s not the fact that they were pushed aside that they see as so problematic. They’re telling a story about what happened once they were pushed aside. They think that’s created a set of conditions that led to these events that are at the heart of the impeachment inquiry. And that’s really what investigators are trying to get to the bottom of. And now, they’ve been able to establish how the circumstances, or the scene, was set for those things to happen by these current and former diplomats. But they still have more investigative work to flesh that out. ^CLARE TOENISKOETTER^ O.K., we’re walking up.All right. So I’m going to just watch for —If that’s O.K.Yeah, yeah.So in the middle of all this on Wednesday, I meet up with my colleague, Sheryl Stolberg.Yeah, we’ll probably go to one of those tables.You think it’ll be a standing interview?I hope not. But, you know, a guy’s got to get his steps in.And we’re going to go upstairs into the Capitol to interview Adam Schiff, the Democratic congressman who chairs the Intelligence Committee and is the man at the center of all these hearings leading the impeachment investigation. We had been hoping to sit down with Schiff in his office and have a kind of quieter, more reflective meeting. But indicative of the way things are in the middle of this inquiry, his staff asked, instead, if we could meet in a reception room.Let’s take this corner.Right off the floor of the Capitol, where there were different meet-and-greets going on, and constituents were meeting with their members of Congress. And the room was buzzing and lively.And we staked out a corner where we could talk to Congressman Schiff.How are you doing?How are you?Good.Here, and Sheryl’s over here too.Hi!Hi, how are you?And we were able to put to him some, kind of, key questions about what we thought was going on to see how he sees it.You know, the president talks a lot about the deep state. Does it strike you that this is exactly what he fears, or what he thinks of as the deep state?You know, the deep state theory used to be a fringe theory in third-world countries or kooky conspiracy theorists at home. When the president talks about the deep state, what he’s really talking about is, in particular, people that expose his wrongdoing and misconduct.At one point, we put the question to him of what he made of all these diplomats coming forward and telling this story.You know, there’s no revolt, and there’s no deep state.I’m being —He quibbled a little bit with the wording that Sheryl used. But he basically said, I agree with the premise of the question.I think it’s a very serious attack on career public servants who are unwilling to compromise themselves in the president’s service.This has to be the last question because I’ve got to go vote on the last vote.I have two more real quickies. Do you have enough evidence to impeach?I’ve got to go vote.Can he come back or is that it?I can ask.So another busy day. Where is your head as Wednesday comes to an end?So by the end of Wednesday, it just feels inescapable that this is all building, at least this week, towards Gordon Sondland coming in himself on Thursday and giving his account of what happened, of facing questions about these various accusations and accounts that investigators have been getting all week. And figuring out, how does he explain this stuff? How does he view what was going on? And we left the Capitol Wednesday evening waiting to see exactly what he was going to say.Right. Like, if this is a play, the character that everyone’s been talking about for the last 90 minutes eventually has to come onstage and say something.That’s right. Except for, in this case, the stage is behind closed doors. And saying something, it turns out, amounts to releasing an 18-page opening statement Thursday morning right before he begins to answer questions.Hello.Hi.Welcome.Very nice to see you.Very nice to see you.So that’s how Thursday morning begins. I walk into the Capitol with Rachel and Clare just as, it seems, you are digesting Gordon Sondland’s opening statements.And my morning was basically spent trying to go through 18 pages of what he was going to go in there and say.We received a copy of his opening statement. And Mike Schmidt, our colleague, and I pored through it to try and figure out, what’s new here? What’s he addressing? What does he have to say? And a couple of things jumped out at us. He basically says, in a meeting that he had with President Trump in May, not long after the new Ukrainian president is elected, President Trump basically rejected Sondland’s advice and the advice of other diplomats that were with him who said, you know, Mr. President, we think you ought to meet with this new guy. We think he’s going to do good work. Trump didn’t seem interested, and then directed them, Sondland said, to go through Rudy Giuliani, to go through his private lawyer.On Ukraine foreign policy.He gave Sondland, his ambassador to the European Union, and other high-ranking officials in the room the direct impression that he had empowered Rudy Giuliani to basically run American policy toward Ukraine.Wow.I mean, all week we’d been hearing these career nonpartisan diplomats coming in and pointing at Gordon Sondland. And here you have Gordon Sondland turning around just as quickly and pointing at the president and Rudy Giuliani and saying, everything I did, I did because they told me to. And I didn’t always feel good about it. I don’t think Rudy Giuliani should have been involved. I think the men and women of the State Department ought to be running our foreign policy, he testified. But I have to follow the directions of the president. And I thought, more or less, that I could work within those parameters to still achieve an end that I believed in, to still help Ukraine. And he said something interesting. He says, I didn’t realize at first. It was only later that I realized that Rudy Giuliani may have had some other motivations in mind. As if all of this is not enough, one of the president’s loyal diplomats seeming to turn on him and point the finger back at him.Hello.How are you?Mr. Shear.Good to see you.My colleague Mike Shear walks up.I’m just going to say, any email that starts with, “This will be interesting,” I want to read the rest of.Mick Mulvaney is about to give a press briefing.Oh, jeez.And says, hey, the White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, who never addresses the press, has just scheduled a 12:30 press conference at the White House. He’s going to talk to reporters. And we think he’s going to talk about Ukraine.But, I mean, he should get a lot of questions about this stuff, about impeachment. I mean, he’s going to the White House press briefing room.So Mike and I go back to a press room just outside the SCIF and set up shop around his computer, where we tune into this press conference.Mm-hmm.(WHISPERING) What’s happening?We’re with Nick Fandos and Mike Shear watching Mulvaney.He starts to field questions. And it gets crazy really fast.Did he also mention to me in the past the corruption related to the D.N.C. server? Absolutely. No question about that. But that’s it. And that’s why we held up the money.After this week of slow drip disclosures, and after weeks of the White House denying that there had been any kind of leverage, or quid pro quo, or exchange with the Ukrainians around the suspension of security aid for the country, he comes out and basically says — he does say, on the record, that —So the demand for an investigation into the Democrats was part of the reason that he ordered to withhold funding to the Ukraine?The look back to what happened in 2016 certainly was part of the thing that he was worried about in corruption with that nation. Then that is absolutely appropriate.The White House withheld the aid for several reasons. And one of those reasons was President Trump wanted Ukraine to first commit to investigating potential collusion between Ukrainians and Democrats in the 2016 election that was meant to undermine his campaign. And on top of it, Mulvaney says, yep, this was the deal.Let’s be clear. What you’ve just described is a quid pro quo.Reporters quickly call it a quid pro quo.It is — funding will not flow unless the investigation into the Democratic server happened as well.We do that all the time with foreign policy.And he said, that’s fine. It happens all the time. There’s nothing wrong with it.If you read the news reports, and you believe them — what did McKinney say yesterday? Well, McKinney said yesterday that he was really upset with the political influence in foreign policy, that was one of the reasons he was so upset about this. And I have news for everybody, get over it. There’s going to be political influence in foreign policy.I mean, that’s an extraordinary thing for the White House chief of staff to say.It is. And he goes a little bit further. He’s asked about Rudy Giuliani and his role. And his defense, again, is essentially that the president of the United States gets to dictate foreign policy. And if he wants his personal lawyer — a guy who he’s not paying, a guy who’s doing business, by the way, in Ukraine at the same time he’s evidently doing diplomacy — to run American foreign policy, well, that’s his prerogative. Elections have consequences. And that’s O.K. There’s nothing wrong with it.Elections do have consequences. And they should. And your foreign policy is going to change. Obama did it in one way, we’re doing it in a different way. And there’s no problem with that.It’s a pretty stunning assertion. A pretty stunning view of executive power. It suggests the White House has not been telling the whole truth up till today.And then decided to tell it in a kind of extreme, unexpected way.Right. It’s a little baffling to understand what exactly Mick Mulvaney was doing here.I’m not going to take anymore. It’s nice to see everybody. Thanks again.All right, so we should — we should get on the phone.What the hell just happened?Why don’t you take some time to figure out what this all means?There’s also probably about to be a House vote, where we may need to go and see if we can’t get some quick reaction.You know, it was pretty evident in the hour or so after that press conference that lawmakers on Capitol Hill didn’t quite know what to make of it either.Today, the chief of staff said what we’ve always just talked about. It was also about exonerating Russia and looking at the 2016 election.Some said, well, they just admitted to the whole thing, I suppose. So what do we do now? Others, Adam Schiff said —It certainly indicates that things have gone from very, very bad to much, much worse.A story that’s very, very bad just got much, much worse.Well, to the extent, Nick, that it’s knowable, what do you make of why the White House decided to do this? It’s kind of hard to understand.It is. We don’t know if Mulvaney was acting on his own authority, who had put him out there. The president’s legal team, one of his other lawyers who’s not Rudy Giuliani, said he hadn’t been consulted before Mulvaney went out there. You know, there has been a move that President Trump returns to time and again in his presidency. And part of me wonders if this isn’t the same thing, where, when he’s being accused of something bad, of having done something under the table or that would be deemed inappropriate for others, instead of pretending he didn’t, he just kind of throws it all out into the open and says, you know, yeah, I did this. But I don’t think there’s anything wrong with it. So what? Tell me it’s wrong. And I think at the end of this week, one of the biggest questions that I think emerges from all this stuff is that it’s now up to Congress, not just Democrats, but Republicans, too, to answer that question and say, is this right, or is this wrong? If he’s going to own up to most of it, and assuming that more officials come forward and fill in different pieces of this story as we’re coming to understand it, you know, can they stomach that? And is that a transgression that they’re willing to say is worthy of impeachment and worthy of his removal from office? I mean, it’s kind of on the president’s part, potentially, the ultimate high-stakes bluff, and I don’t think we know yet where things are going to fall out.I think what we’re left with at the end of this week is, like, a question. Is this a story of a bunch of career diplomats, who have never really much liked President Trump or his policies, rebelling against him? And I don’t think that they really see it that way. From their perspective, you know, they’re used to having policy differences with presidents of both parties. They’re trained to implement the policies of Republicans and of Democrats. What I think is different, what is leading otherwise anonymous officials to blow the whistle, to march up to Capitol Hill and walk down all those flights of steps to the House SCIF and tell the story as they see it, is that they see this as something fundamentally different, and, importantly, as a part of their responsibility as permanent agents of the government, of people who are working on behalf of the American people, not a particular president, and that only when things seem to get so bad did they decide they needed to speak up.Nick, thank you for essentially giving us your entire week. We appreciate it.It was a pleasure to have the company.It can get lonely in front of a SCIF, I imagine. Anyway, thank you, truly.Yeah, I’m glad you guys were here. It’s been quite a story.The rest — so on Thursday night, there was a huge bipartisan outcry, and the White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, tries to walk back his comments about a quid pro quo with Ukraine. He issues a statement essentially denying what he has said just a few hours earlier. And I’m going to read you the quote. He said, “Let me be clear. There was absolutely no quid pro quo between Ukrainian military aid and any investigation into the 2016 election.” We’ll be right back.How does it sound?It sounds pretty good.Sound O.K.?I’ve never actually produced a bit of — any audio on my own. So this is a bit of an experiment.O.K., great.And I think this is definitely the first time we have done the headlines of “The Daily” inside the Senate press gallery. So Sheryl Stolberg — oh, I think, I’m supposed to hold this to my own mouth.So Sheryl, what do we need to know today?So it was a really busy news day.Today, I’m proud to report, thanks to the strong leadership of President Donald Trump and the strong relationship between President Erdogan in Turkey and the United States of America that today, the United States and Turkey have agreed to a cease-fire in Syria.Vice President Pence flew to Turkey, and on Thursday afternoon, he announced that Turkey had agreed to a cease-fire in which the Turkish government would suspend its military operations in northern Syria for five days in order to give the Kurds time to clear the area. So that raises the question, is this a breakthrough, or is this just giving Turkey what it wants in the first place, because they wanted the Kurds out?What else?Will you support this deal? What do you think of it?Well, from what we’ve read of this deal, it doesn’t meet our demands or our expectations.There’s finally a deal for Brexit that the European Union and Britain both think will work. But it’s not clear if it’s going to pass, because it has to go through Parliament, and the Labour Party has already said it’s opposed.We are unhappy with this deal, and as it stands, we’ll vote against it.And finally, on Thursday, it was a sad day here in the Capitol, because Representative Elijah Cummings, a towering figure in the House, died. Cummings was a son of sharecroppers. His own presence here was really a miracle to him.My father had never been in the Capitol building. He said, isn’t this the place where they used to call us slaves? I said, yes sir. And isn’t this the place they used to call us three-fifths of a man? I said, yes, sir. And isn’t this the place that they used to call us chattel? I say, yes, yes, yes, sir. And I’ll never forget, he said, when I think about you being sworn in today, he said, now I see what I could have been if I had had an opportunity.And over the last year, as chairman of the House Oversight Committee, he had been a central figure in the investigations of the president, and in his role in these investigations, he continually pleaded for decency.We are better than this. We are so much — we really are. As a country, we are so much better than this. And I’m hoping that all of us can get back to this democracy that we want and that we should be passing on to our children so that they can do better than what we did.Sheryl, thank you.Thank you, Michael.We’re walking out?45 p.m. We appear to be the last journalists inside the U.S. Capitol. Feels like a good time to talk about who made the shows this week. “The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson. Walking and doing credits at the same time?But Mr. Mulvaney was defiant and unapologetic at the suggestion that there was anything wrong with the president’s relying on political loyalists to conduct foreign policy.“I have news for everybody: Get over it. There’s going to be political influence in foreign policy,” he said, adding, “Elections have consequences.”In wide-ranging remarks, Mr. Mulvaney told reporters at the White House that the $391 million in military aid was initially withheld from Ukraine because the president was displeased that European countries were not as generous with their assistance. He also wanted more attention paid to Ukraine’s persistent political corruption.Mr. Mulvaney denied that the aid for Ukraine was also contingent on its government’s opening an investigation into either former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., a leading Democratic candidate for president, or his younger son, Hunter Biden. Asked whether he did anything to pressure President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to investigate the Bidens, Mr. Mulvaney said no.But the president did pressure Ukraine to re-examine discredited theories that Ukraine, not Russia, had worked to sway the 2016 campaign. Mr. Mulvaney’s mention of a “D.N.C. server” was a reference to an unfounded conspiracy theory promoted by Mr. Trump that Ukraine was somehow involved in Russia’s 2016 theft of emails from the Democratic National Committee and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Mr. Mulvaney tied the server to the Justice Department’s review of the origins of the Russia investigation, led by the United States attorney in Connecticut, John H. Durham, and closely overseen by Attorney General William P. Barr.“That’s an ongoing investigation,” Mr. Mulvaney said. “So you’re saying the president of the United States, the chief law enforcement person, cannot ask somebody to cooperate with an ongoing public investigation into wrongdoing? That’s just bizarre to me that you would think that you can’t do that.”But while the Justice Department said last month that Mr. Durham was examining any role that Ukraine might have played in the early stages of the Russia investigation, a department official declined on Thursday to comment on whether he was examining the server conspiracy theory. Russian military officers hacked Democratic servers to steal thousands of emails in 2016, the intelligence community and the special counsel found, and no one has uncovered evidence of Ukrainian involvement.Justice Department officials were confused and angry when they heard that Mr. Mulvaney said the White House had frozen aid to Ukraine in exchange for help with the Durham investigation, according to a person familiar with their discussions.“If the White House was withholding aid in regards to the cooperation of any investigation at the Department of Justice, that is news to us,” a senior Justice Department official said. Mr. Durham was seen leaving the Justice Department around midday Thursday.Mr. Mulvaney said the president had done nothing improper and had stayed within normal diplomatic channels. He blasted the current and former administration officials who have testified in the impeachment inquiry, describing them as personally opposed to the changes in foreign policy that Mr. Trump had put in place.“What you’re seeing now, I believe, is a group of mostly career bureaucrats who are saying, ‘You know what, I don’t like President Trump’s politics, so I’m going to participate in this witch hunt that they are undertaking on the hill.’”Mr. Mulvaney said holding up Ukraine’s aid was a normal part of foreign policy, and he compared it to the foreign aid to Central America that the administration froze until Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras agreed to adopt the immigration policies pressed by Mr. Trump.Asked whether he had admitted to a quid pro quo, Mr. Mulvaney said, “We do that all the time with foreign policy." His answer ignored the distinction — raised by many of the president’s critics — between holding up foreign aid to further American interests and holding up foreign aid to further Mr. Trump’s personal interests.Senior White House aides like Mr. Mulvaney are often largely immune from congressional subpoenas to discuss their private conversations with the president, but talking about them publicly in such an extended way could undermine that legal protection.Democrats had already been interested in Mr. Mulvaney’s role in the Ukraine matter after several impeachment witnesses described him as a central player in the effort to hold up the aid in the days before Mr. Trump pressed Ukraine’s president to investigate Mr. Biden.They also have said they want to know whether Mr. Mulvaney helped prevent a White House meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Zelensky until the Ukrainian government agreed to investigate the president’s rivals, including the D.N.C. and the Bidens.Fiona Hill, the president’s former senior director for European and Russian affairs at the National Security Council, testified that Mr. Mulvaney was part of a trio of Trump loyalists who conducted a rogue foreign policy operation in Ukraine.Ms. Hill told lawmakers that John R. Bolton, then the national security adviser, instructed her in early July to advise the National Security Council’s chief lawyer about the effort by Mr. Mulvaney, Mr. Sondland and Mr. Giuliani.“I am not part of whatever drug deal Sondland and Mulvaney are cooking up,” Mr. Bolton told Ms. Hill to tell White House lawyers, according to two people at Ms. Hill’s deposition, which took place on Monday.In his remarks on Thursday, Mr. Mulvaney said there was nothing wrong with Mr. Trump’s relying on Mr. Giuliani or others outside of the diplomatic corps to conduct foreign policy. “That’s the president’s call,” he said. “You may not like the fact that Giuliani was involved. That’s great, that’s fine. It’s not illegal, it’s not impeachable.” He added, “The president gets to set foreign policy, and he gets to choose who to do so.”Democrats are also eager to know about a May 23 meeting during which career diplomats with responsibility for Ukraine were sidelined in favor of Mr. Sondland, Kurt D. Volker, the special envoy for Ukraine; and Rick Perry, the energy secretary, one witness testified.George P. Kent, the deputy assistant secretary in the Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, testified Tuesday that Mr. Mulvaney called the White House meeting, according to Representative Gerald E. Connolly, Democrat of Virginia, who was in the room for Mr. Kent’s testimony.Katie Benner and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York.Advertisement