https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/27/business/boeing-737-max-crashes.html
Before Deadly Crashes, Boeing Pushed for Law That Undercut Oversight - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
38
The government has been handing over more responsibility to manufacturers for years. The new law makes it even harder for regulators to review Boeing’s work.Months after a second crash of the Boeing Max 737, the plane remains grounded and the company mired in crisis.Credit...Gary He/ReutersSupported byBy Natalie Kitroeff and David GellesWith a few short paragraphs tucked into 463 pages of legislation last year, Boeing scored one of its biggest lobbying wins: a law that undercuts the government’s role in approving the design of new airplanes.For years, the government had been handing over more responsibility to manufacturers as a way to reduce bureaucracy. But those paragraphs cemented the industry’s power, allowing manufacturers to challenge regulators over safety disputes and making it difficult for the government to usurp companies’ authority.Although the law applies broadly to the industry, Boeing, the nation’s dominant aerospace manufacturer, is the biggest beneficiary. An examination by The New York Times, based on interviews with more than 50 regulators, industry executives, congressional staff members and lobbyists, as well as drafts of the bill and federal documents, found that Boeing and its allies helped craft the legislation to their liking, shaping the language of the law and overcoming criticism from regulators.In a stark warning as the bill was being written, the Federal Aviation Administration said that it would “not be in the best interest of safety.”A labor group representing agency inspectors raised concerns that the rules would turn the F.A.A. into a “rubber stamp” that would only be able to intervene after a plane crashed “and people are killed,” according to internal union documents reviewed by The Times.Weeks after the law was passed, a Boeing 737 Max jet crashed off the coast of Indonesia, killing everyone on board. A second Max crashed in Ethiopia less than five months later, and the plane was grounded.On both doomed flights, a new automated system on the Max, designed to help avoid stalls, triggered erroneously, sending them into fatal nose-dives. Mired in crisis, Boeing is still trying to fix the plane and get it flying again.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: In testimony before Congress, the chief executive of Boeing said, quote, “If we knew everything back then that we know now, we would have made a different decision.” So what did Boeing executives know, and when did they know it?It’s Thursday, October 31.So Natalie, for the past six months, we have been talking to you about what went wrong with Boeing’s 737 Max, this jet that crashed twice, basically back to back, over the past year and both times killed everybody on board. Remind us what you have uncovered about those crashes up until now. What went wrong?So the first 737 Max crashes in October. It’s not really clear what’s going on. It seems like it’s a new automated system on the plane. Less than five months later, another plane crashes in Ethiopia. And at that point, the U.S. and regulators around the world ground the plane. That’s when we really started digging into what went wrong here.Natalie Kitroeff is a business reporter at The Times.And one of the central questions we’ve been trying to get at is, how was this plane designed, and how was it certified? And what we found out was that what contributed to both accidents was this MCAS system that was supposed to help pilots, but what it actually did was constantly push the nose of the plane down. So they had to struggle with it in both accidents, and the system pushed both planes into fatal nose-dives.And so there were design weaknesses there that were built into this system from the very beginning. And on the regulator side, we learned that the Federal Aviation Administration basically handed Boeing the responsibility for determining the safety of much of this aircraft. Boeing was regulating itself, to a certain degree. And Boeing never really fully explains this system, MCAS, to the regulators, and this is the system that contributes to both of the crashes.But one of the central questions that remained was, what did Boeing know? What did the executives at the highest levels of the company know about potential problems with this plane, about potential flaws in this system? And when did they know it? And that’s why the C.E.O. of Boeing, Dennis Muilenburg, was hauled up to the Hill to testify in front of Congress this week for the first time since both crashes — because lawmakers had the same questions that we did.This hearing will come to order. Thank you all for being here today.Right, and you were there. So set the scene for us of what this was like inside the Capitol.So the hearings start on Tuesday in the Senate, and the room is palpably tense. There is a row of family members of the victims of the crashes that are holding signs showing the faces of their loved ones.Wow.And then Dennis Muilenburg files in, and he takes his seat, and he begins delivering his opening statement.Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, committee members, thank you for the opportunity to join you today, and we share your commitment to aviation safety.He’s not someone who’s known as a very comfortable public speaker. He sometimes has a wooden affect.Before we start today, I’d like to speak directly to the families of the victims who are here with us.But he begins his opening statement by immediately apologizing to the families.We are sorry — deeply and truly sorry. As a husband and father myself, I’m heartbroken by your losses.I think about you and your loved ones every day, and I know our entire Boeing team does as well.He says that the company knows that it made mistakes, and he vows to make improvements.We can and must do better.This is someone whose entire career, basically, has been devoted to the Boeing Company.I started at Boeing as a summer intern in Seattle. I was a junior at Iowa State University, studying engineering, having grown up at a family farm in Iowa. I was awestruck to work at the company that brought the jet age to the world and helped land a person on the moon.He’s saying, look, we share your commitment to safety, and that’s what he’s there to really persuade them of. And he says that he is looking forward to their questions — questions that turn out to be a pummeling from senators.What do you mean?Well, the senators, from the get-go, are really laying into Mr. Muilenburg.I’ve got to tell you — and I think I told you guys this in an office some time ago, I would walk before I was to get on a 737 Max. I would walk. There is no way.And the one who really goes the hardest is Senator Ted Cruz.Mr. Muilenburg, I have to say, the testimony here today has been quite dismaying.Senator Cruz starts in on a really intense line of questioning about this set of instant messages from November 2016, long before the crashes, that Congress just recently got its hands on.This was a text exchange between Mark Forkner, who was then Boeing’s chief technical pilot for the Max, and Mr. Gustavsson, Boeing’s 737 chief technical pilot, is that right?I believe that’s the case, Senator, yeah.So this exchange is stunning.In the messages, one of the pilots, a guy named Mark Forkner, is talking about how MCAS, this system, is causing him trouble in the simulator.Mr. Forkner, “Oh, shocker alert! MCAS is now active down to M2. It’s running rampant in the sim on me.”He says, it’s running rampant in the flight simulator. That’s this giant machine that’s used for testing. And then he says —Mr. Forkner, “So basically, I lied to the regulators unknowingly.”— so I basically lied to regulators unknowingly.And what does he mean by that?Well, The Times revealed in an investigation earlier this year that Forkner, months before these messages, had asked the F.A.A. to take MCAS, to take this system, out of the pilots’ manual. And at the time, he described it as a system that would almost never activate in a normal flight and that wasn’t all that significant. He played down the risks.It seems like he’s realizing that this system, MCAS, is more problematic than he thought and that he had told the F.A.A.That is one possibility, and it’s certainly what many senators on Tuesday seemed to think was happening.O.K., and how does Muilenburg respond to this line of questioning, especially from Senator Cruz, who’s coming so hard at him about it?Well, Muilenburg says that he became aware of these messages between the pilots before the second crash, but he says he did not dig into the details until very recently. And that’s the point on which Senator Cruz really hammers him. He says, “You’re the C.E.O.”The buck stops with you. Did you read this document? And how did your team not put it in front of you, run in with their hair on fire, saying, we got a real problem here? How did you not, in February, set out a nine-alarm fire to say, we need to figure out exactly what happened, not after all the hearings, not after the pressure, but because 346 people have died, and we don’t want another person to die?He’s basically saying to the C.E.O., you should have been on this. You should have wanted to know what was in those messages before the second crash happened. And senators were asking him this question —The fact that it took another tragedy to actually ground the airplane so you could actually have a fix that worked —— why didn’t you act sooner?Why didn’t we react? Why didn’t we ground that aircraft a lot sooner so that another tragedy wouldn’t happen?Why didn’t we ground the plane earlier?Before the second crash?Exactly. We could have avoided a second tragedy. And —Senator, we have asked that question over and over. And —He said, if we could go back and do it over —If we could go back, we would have made a different decision.— we would ground the plane after the first crash. If we had the information then that we have now, we would have acted differently. But the lawmakers have a different view. I mean, many of them are saying, you did have some of this information. And the question they’re asking is, why didn’t you act sooner, given what was already on your desk?Right. So the central question about what Boeing knew, when it knew it, at least part of the answer is starting to become a little bit clearer, according to these senators, which is that the C.E.O. knew something before the second crash. And they’re saying that something should have been the basis for action that could have prevented the second crash.That’s right.We’ll be right back.What happens next in these hearings? How do they keep pursuing this question of what was known inside Boeing?Committee on Transportation Infrastructure will come to order.Well, they pursue it by continuing to dig into documents. On Wednesday, these hearings move to the House. And the chairman of the Transportation Committee, Peter DeFazio, brings new documents.And I put up another document. It’s right in front of you there. And at 12/17/2015, I don’t know if you’ve — aware of this, but this was raised by one of your engineers.He brings one document that shows that in 2015, two years before the Max was cleared to fly, a Boeing employee raised concerns about the fact that the system could trigger based on just one sensor.Are we vulnerable to a single A.O.A. sensor failure with the MCAS implementation, or is there some checking that occurs?And the employee basically said, wait a minute. Doesn’t that make this system vulnerable to a single point of failure? The concern is if one sensor is responsible for all of this, then if that sensor fails, the whole system is in jeopardy. And that is precisely what happened in both of the crashes.So that’s a very specific warning and a warning that came, according to DeFazio, years before the plane was even on the market, which feels like a very significant and potentially damning revelation.Right.And then we have information provided to the committee by Boeing, which will now be the second slide.We also saw a document that showed that Boeing employees determined in June of 2018 — this is after the plane is flying, but months before the first crash — that if pilots took more than 10 seconds to intervene after an MCAS malfunction, the result could be catastrophic.And it says, “A slow reaction time scenario, 10 seconds, found the failure to be catastrophic.”Meaning the plane would go down.That a 10-second delay, which doesn’t seem like a lot of time to me, particularly —Just 10 seconds? There was basically no margin for error, and the plane could crash?Right. Now, keep in mind, 10 seconds for a pilot is longer than it seems, but what we saw in these accidents is that pilots weren’t immediately responding to this system. There were so many warnings in the cockpit as this system was going off, as it was malfunctioning, that they became overwhelmed, it seemed. And that’s part of why what you saw was they’re fighting against this nose-down movement until the planes both went into fatal nose-dives.I’d like to read from an email that was sent to the general manager of the 737 program in June 2018.And we also heard about an exchange between a Boeing employee and the general manager of the 737 program from June 2018. Again, this is months before the first crash, in which this employee says that —“I have some safety concerns that I need to share with you as the leader of the 737 program. My first concern,” he states, “is that our workforce is exhausted.”— the workforce is exhausted on the 737 line. Employees are fatigued.“Employees are fatigued from having to work at a very high pace for an extended period of time. Fatigued employees —“Fatigued employees make mistakes.”— make mistakes.”And that schedule pressure, combined with fatigue, is creating a culture where employees are either deliberately or unconsciously circumventing established processes. This employee points to process breakdowns and says, look, all my internal warning bells are going off.“And for the first time in my life, I am sorry to say that I am hesitant about putting my family on a Boeing airplane.”Wow. So in this second day of hearings, as these documents are being presented or described, does it become clear whether Muilenburg or any of the senior executives at Boeing saw them when they were being generated and, of course, before the planes crashed?Well, we don’t know in every case, but we know for sure that he received the warning about how the 737 line workers were fatigued and potentially cutting corners, because that email went directly to him.Congressman, I’m familiar with that last communication that you referenced, and we did have several follow-up sessions with him. I told him I appreciated the fact that he brought up those issues and concerns.And —Just one quick follow-up.— Representative DeFazio asked Mr. Muilenburg, did you slow down production after you received this message?Did you reduce the rate of production at that point in time, given his concerns?And Muilenburg said no.Sir, we did not change the production rate.O.K. All right, thank you.Again, I think it’s very important that when you change a production rate in a line like ours, any change, up or down —Sir, I understand there’s a whole supply chain. Understood.He said that the 737 factory kept churning out the planes at a rate of 52 a month. He said that it would have compromised safety to slow down production all of a sudden. It wasn’t exactly clear what he meant by that.Natalie, what does it say about Boeing that all these puzzle pieces, all these various concerns that have been revealed over the past few days, that they never really came together for Boeing and its top executives, at least in the telling of the C.E.O., to the point where the company felt it needed to act?Look, I think Boeing is wrestling with that question right now. On the one hand, you can see how, inside the biggest aircraft maker in the world, there are sometimes emails that go to the C.E.O. that might go unnoticed. There are issues that people have that might not be taken seriously at the time because engineers always have disputes. These things are always discussed. In retrospect, it can look much more significant. But at the time, it’s just viewed as part of the process.On the other hand, this isn’t just any other giant corporation. This is the biggest airplane manufacturer in the world. The job is to produce safe airplanes. And when there are two catastrophic accidents that kill 346 people, it’s obvious that lawmakers, investigators, family members of the victims are going to comb through every warning, every potential concern that either was elevated to the highest levels or should have been. And they’re going to ask, why didn’t you do more?So after these two days of testimony, it’s very clear that Boeing’s C.E.O. is sorry. But it sounds like his overall message is that Boeing, knowing what it knew at the time, did what it could do, but that the puzzle pieces did not come together in a way that would have really allowed Boeing to prevent these two plane crashes. And I wonder if that seems credible to these lawmakers.I have to say, I think, overall, they believed that he was genuinely sorry, that he genuinely wanted to make improvements. But they seemed unconvinced that Boeing did all it could do, and really what they were pressing on was the question of accountability. They want someone — maybe more than one person — to be held responsible for these accidents.Let me ask you this, Mr. Muilenburg. You said you’re accountable.At one point, Representative Stephen Cohen of Tennessee was basically yelling at Muilenburg —What does accountability mean? Are you taking a cut in pay? Are you working for free from now on till you can cure this problem? These people’s relatives are not coming back. They’re gone.— asking him, “What does accountability mean?”Your salary is still on. Is anybody at Boeing taking a cut or working for free to try to rectify this problem?And what does Muilenburg say?Congressman, it’s not about the money for me. That’s not why I came —Are you giving up any money?Congressman, my board will conduct a comprehensive review. That’s —So you’re saying you’re not giving up any compensation at all?He said, basically, my pay is up to the board. He noted that executives at the company weren’t going to be getting a bonus this year.Again, our board will make those determinations.You’re not accountable then. You’re saying the board’s accountable.Congressman, I am accountable, sir. I take responsibility for these two accidents that occurred on my watch. I feel responsible to carry that through. As I mentioned earlier, I grew up on a farm in Iowa. My dad taught me responsibility.He said, I’m an Iowa farm boy. I was taught by my dad that you work through these things.What he told me is to — when they’re faced with challenges, to carry through. And I don’t want to run away from challenges. My intent is to see this through.When asked if he was going to step down —And I want to ask you, are you going to be stepping down as C.E.O. of Boeing?— he said directly —Congresswoman, I — no.No?— no. But the lawmakers really didn’t let this issue of accountability go. At one point, one of the representatives said, “Mr. Muilenburg, turn. Face the families. Look them in the eye.”I want you to take a look at them just for one second, because obviously you haven’t spoken to them.Look, Congresswoman, I —So I’m going to continue. Thank you, Mr. Muilenburg.So Natalie, how did these two days of hearings end?I thank the gentlelady. I ask, in unanimous consent —So at the conclusion of all of this, as the final hearing is wrapping up, I step outside with Nadia Milleron, who’s the mother of Samya Stumo, who died in the Ethiopia crash.I just want to know, after two days of hearings, how do you feel now?And I asked her, “How have these hearings been for you? What do you make of this?” And she says she’s not satisfied. In fact —I am horrified that he’s getting a $15 million reward after these air crashes.She’s outraged by how much Muilenburg makes. And she can’t believe these new revelations — the idea that there’s new evidence that Boeing and that Muilenburg knew about employee concerns before the crashes.It sounds like you feel like there have been new pieces of information that have —Definitely.— that have come to life?Definitely new pieces of information. Those slides were definitely shocking to me. That people waved their hand at Boeing and said, “Things are wrong,” and then he basically ignored them.I mean, it just has her incensed. And then — and she says to me, I actually need to go, because I want to go confront him, face to face, when this thing ends.Wow.So we go back inside.[GAVEL SLAMMING]DeFazio hits the gavel. The hearing’s over. Everybody’s filing out. And Nadia marches over to Muilenburg and meets him, face to face. And you could tell his people want to get him out of there. There’s a security guard around, but he talks to her. One of the things she says to him is —You were talking about your performance and, like, how you’ve been in this company.You kept saying that you’re an Iowa farm boy.And then you start talking about Iowa. And you talked about Iowa just, like, one too many times. And the whole group said, go back to the farm. Go back to Iowa. Do that.Well, we, the family members of the victims, want you to go back to the farm.And it’s because when you make all — mistakes like that, and you can acknowledge them, then maybe someone else should do that work.She’s saying, we don’t think you’re the guy that should be in here trying to solve this.We don’t trust you?That’s what she’s saying. She’s saying, we don’t want you in there. And he says —I respect your inputs there. Let me just tell you, we are very focused on safety. And you have my commitment, my personal commitment, and the commitment of our company that we’re going to make the safety improvements we need to make.And so at the end of this, they’re at this kind of impasse where she’s saying, we want you out, and he says, I hear you, but I’m not going anywhere.Transparency — thank you on your transparency.Thank you, thank you.At that point, they turn and walk away from each other. She walks over to the group of families, and he walks out of the hearing.That all sounds kind of unsatisfying to everybody.Yeah, I don’t think anybody walked out feeling particularly good about what happened in that room.Natalie, thank you.Thanks for having me.The Boeing 737 Max remains grounded. The company’s board of directors is standing by Dennis Muilenburg, and Congress says its investigation will continue.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today. In the latest testimony before impeachment investigators, a Foreign Service officer assigned to the White House, Catherine Croft, offered new insight into the campaign to fire the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch. The officer testified that a well-known former Republican congressman, Robert Livingston, now a lobbyist, repeatedly told her that Yovanovitch needed to be removed because she was an ally of President Obama with a liberal agenda — the same dubious claims made by President Trump and his lawyer, Rudy Giuliani. Both Trump and Giuliani viewed Yovanovitch as an obstacle in their attempts to pressure Ukraine to investigate Trump’s rivals. And —Well, right now, the fire is encircling the Air Force One pavilion where, obviously, the famous Air Force One sits. It’s a national treasure.— the latest California wildfire in Ventura County burned its way to within 100 yards of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, whose executive director, in an interview with CBS News, said that the flames had encircled the pavilion holding Reagan’s private plane.So far, the library has been protected, but we’re surrounded on all sides by the fire right now.Like many of the fires that have erupted in recent days, the Ventura County blaze was fueled by dry conditions and wind gusts that have reached hurricane force. In western Los Angeles, a different fire briefly threatened the Getty Center, a museum filled with priceless artworks, before firefighters beat back the flames.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.In the aftermath, lawmakers have seized on flaws in a regulatory system that cedes control to industry — an issue that is likely to put Boeing on the defensive this week when the company’s chief executive, Dennis A. Muilenburg, testifies before Congress for the first time since the two crashes.The F.A.A. never fully analyzed the automated system known as MCAS, while Boeing played down its risks. Late in the plane’s development, Boeing made the system more aggressive, changes that were not submitted in a safety assessment to the agency.The Max was certified under the old rules. The new law, the F.A.A. Reauthorization Act of 2018, makes it even more difficult for the government to review manufacturers’ work.In the past, agency officials could decide whether to delegate oversight to the company or to maintain control, depending on the importance of a system or concerns about safety. Now, the agency, at the outset of the development process, has to hand over responsibility for certifying almost every aspect of new planes.If F.A.A. officials decide a system may compromise safety, the new rules dictate that they will need to conduct an investigation or an inspection to make their case before taking back control. If the officials raise concerns, ask for changes or otherwise miss certification deadlines, any disputes are automatically elevated by law to managers at the agency and the company.The law also creates a committee of mostly aerospace executives to ensure that the regulator is meeting metrics set by the industry, and the law allows companies to make recommendations about the compensation of F.A.A. employees.“The reauthorization act mandated regulatory capture,” said Doug Anderson, a former attorney in the agency’s office of chief counsel who reviewed the legislation. “It set the F.A.A. up for being totally deferential to the industry.”A spokesman for Boeing, Gordon Johndroe, said that the certification process is “part of an effective F.A.A. oversight of safety that permits them to focus on the most important issues that are critical to the safety of flight.” He added that “this authority has been a proven way for decades for government regulators across many industries to prioritize resources and rely on technical experts to maintain quality, safety and integrity.”When the legislation was hashed out, the lobbying effort barely registered in the country’s vast political machine. Boeing’s push, and the use of industry language in the crucial paragraphs, was standard amid the deregulatory drive by many businesses. Most of the attention on the bill was focused on a failed Republican effort to privatize the air traffic control system.Since the two fatal accidents, the law has set off worries in Washington about whether the rules championed by Boeing make company deadlines a priority over passenger safety.The manufacturer helped author a report that congressional aides used as a reference while writing the law, borrowing language and ideas that had long been used by Boeing. Its executives pressed Michael Huerta, then the head of the F.A.A., for support, telling him that the regulator’s inefficiency was threatening Boeing’s ability to compete against its chief rival, Airbus of France. They also helped persuade Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington State, where Boeing has its manufacturing hub, to introduce language that requires the F.A.A. to relinquish control of many parts of the certification process.“The method by which the F.A.A. certifies aircraft is in need of repair — I don’t think anyone could argue otherwise at this point,” Representative Rick Larsen, a Democrat from Washington, who voted in favor of the legislation, said in an interview. “No matter what we did last year, we need to be pulling some of that back into the public sphere, and take some of it out of the hands of industry.”In closed-door meetings with congressional staff members, in testimony on Capitol Hill, in memos to lawmakers, the talking points were all the same.Starting in 2014, Boeing and its trade associations explained that streamlining certification would make American aerospace companies more competitive with overseas rivals, by allowing them to develop planes more efficiently.They argued that F.A.A. employees were interpreting the rules in seemingly arbitrary ways and slowing down the development process, according to seven people involved in the discussions and documents reviewed by The Times.In a 2015 memo sent to congressional staff members that was reviewed by The Times, the General Aviation Manufacturers Association, which represents the business jet unit of Boeing, urged lawmakers to “fully implement” the so-called system of delegation. If disputes caused delays, the trade group called for “automatic escalation to appropriate F.A.A. and company management” so that issues didn’t languish.The Aerospace Industries Association, which was headed during part of the lobbying campaign by Mr. Muilenburg of Boeing, echoed those priorities. Richard Efford, a lobbyist for the group, said in an interview that he emphasized the need to “fully utilize” delegation.Boeing executives made the same pitch to Mr. Huerta at industry events and in meetings at the F.A.A., according to three people with knowledge of the matter. It became a routine discussion, they said.And they made their case publicly as well, at times citing the company’s safety record.In a 2015 hearing, Ray Conner, then the head of Boeing’s commercial airplane division, pushed like others for making “full use” of the system. He said it took too long to get approvals for interiors, like seats and bathrooms, that company engineers could assess. He argued that European regulators outsource far more.The language of their lobbying push was rooted in a 2012 report from an industry-dominated committee run by Christine Thompson, a Boeing executive, and Ali Bahrami, an F.A.A. official at the time who later became a lobbyist.In aerospace speak, it called for “full utilization of available delegation,” outsourcing as much oversight as possible. It outlined six recommendations that “will result in the reduction of certification delays” and “enhance the global competitiveness of the U.S. aviation industry.”“There was a consensus that they had good recommendations, and that we ought to put them into writing,” said Matt Bormet, who formerly worked for Mr. Larsen. “I heard no complaints about the report.”Boeing and its allies found a receptive audience in the head of the House transportation committee, Bill Shuster, a Pennsylvania Republican staunchly in favor of deregulation, and his aide working on the legislation, Holly Woodruff Lyons.The F.A.A. Reauthorization Act of 2018 was broadly meant to provide agency funding for the coming years. Lawmakers also used it to introduce new rules for drones, airport noise and the certification process.As Ms. Lyons helped write the law, she was in regular touch with Boeing, according to two people with knowledge of the discussions. The critical paragraphs in the final bill borrowed heavily from industry language, instituting the “full utilization of F.A.A. delegation.”“The certification reforms in the F.A.A. bill were strongly desired and had bipartisan support,” Mr. Shuster said in an email, noting that delegation “has worked well and safely for over 50 years.”The evolution of the bill had the imprint of industry.An early version that Ms. Lyons sent to lobbyists directed the F.A.A. to measure its own performance, according to a draft reviewed by The Times. In one circulated a month later, staff members had added a clause specifying that the agency would be judged in part by a committee dominated by aerospace executives, which would come up with metrics for the regulator.As the Senate prepared its own version in early 2016, Boeing was in close contact with the office of Ms. Cantwell.“Senator Cantwell is responsive to the needs of Washington State businesses,” said Nick Sutter, one of her former staff members. “Boeing people were in and out of the office all the time.”In conversations with a top aide for the senator, Matt McCarthy, Boeing lobbyists pushed for language that would compel the F.A.A. to rely more on manufacturers, according to two people directly involved in the discussions. Mr. McCarthy took a job as a lobbyist for Boeing in September.Regulators and companies agreed that the F.A.A.’s resources were best focused on new and high-risk systems, according to Peggy Gilligan, the agency’s head of safety back then, and several other officials.Ms. Cantwell submitted an amendment that directed the F.A.A. to automatically give companies the right to approve anything deemed “low and medium risk” on an airplane. It was language that particularly helped Boeing, with its wide range of planes.“Listening to your constituents is always the first step in legislating, but it’s certainly not the last,” said Ansley Lacitis, deputy chief of staff for Ms. Cantwell. “This concept of risk-based oversight was bipartisan, consensus-based and recommended by experts.”The amendment passed without any debate. At the hearing, then-Senator Bill Nelson, a Democrat of Florida, cheered the changes. The law, he said, “will boost U.S. manufacturing and exports and — most importantly — create good jobs for Americans.”F.A.A. officials tried to push back, raising concerns to congressional staff members and aerospace executives. But they were constrained in their efforts.As a federal agency, the F.A.A. is forbidden by law to use government resources to influence and lobby Congress. At most, officials could provide comments and feedback, so-called technical assistance in the legislative process.“It is true that we were supportive of delegation as a general philosophy,” said Mr. Huerta, the former F.A.A. chief. “It is not true that means the agency supported every proposal to expand delegation and impose limits on the agency’s ability to take back delegations.”Early on, Ms. Gilligan, the former F.A.A. official, said industry lobbyists suggested that the law should give companies input on performance evaluations of individual F.A.A. employees overseeing the certification of their planes. Two other agency officials confirmed her account.“It appeared they were looking to influence the individuals’ pay outcome in some way, and for the F.A.A. employees to know that potential pay impact,” Ms. Gilligan said.The final bill did not completely satisfy her concerns. The law created a panel with industry representatives to help assess “performance incentive policies” for F.A.A. employees, as long as they “do not conflict with the public interest.”Mostly, top F.A.A. officials worried about the unintended consequences of giving more authority to manufacturers. Boeing employees have described pressures from their managers to meet deadlines while approving systems.Under the old rules, the F.A.A. could decide to take back oversight authority on a system if they were concerned about safety. The new law would require the agency to conduct an investigation or inspection to prove that there was a problem before stepping in, a potentially lengthy process.Industry groups told congressional staff members that manufacturers were sometimes subject to the whims of individual F.A.A. employees, who could block approvals and delay production schedules, according to three people with knowledge of the discussions.“It causes delays and a lot of frustration within the companies,” said Mr. Efford, the lobbyist.But regulators were concerned that the new law would keep them from effectively doing their job.In early 2015, Brian Morris, a safety official at the agency, prepared feedback for lawmakers, arguing that the legislation would prevent the regulator from acting until a dangerous system had already been introduced onto an aircraft. “With this language, Congress is asking us to wait till we find a hazard before removing delegation,” he wrote, according to an F.A.A. document reviewed by The Times.A current and a former F.A.A. official said that Mr. Morris was collecting feedback from multiple departments, so the comments reflected the opinions of other agency staff members. The document notes that the comments were “provided in response to a congressional request.” The Professional Aviation Safety Specialists union, a small labor group that represents F.A.A. employees, had a similar warning. If the regulator could only intercede after documenting problems, it may not be able to stop manufacturers from installing risky systems.“That will, as a practical matter, mean after the accident has happened and people are killed,” the union said in comments prepared for Congress in early 2016, which were reviewed by The Times.Through a spokesman, Ms. Lyons, the congressional aide writing the law, said she did not receive comments from Mr. Morris or the union, but was aware of the F.A.A.’s worries.“The concerns were discussed and considered in a bipartisan manner,” said the House transportation committee spokesman, Justin Harclerode. “Members did not agree with this interpretation of the language, and were not convinced the language would negatively impact the FAA’s ability to safely oversee the aviation industry.”He added that the F.A.A., under the law, could set the parameters of the investigation or inspection.At a ceremony in the Oval Office last October, President Trump signed the F.A.A. Reauthorization Act into law, while Representative Shuster, who shepherded the legislation, looked over his shoulder.The agency has already begun to make the required changes.In August, it announced the formation of the advisory committee charged with setting goals for the regulator. The committee includes two union representatives and 17 industry officials, among them Beth Pasztor, one of Boeing’s top executives. The F.A.A. recently selected managers for an internal office that will help enforce provisions of the law.As the rules take hold, some lawmakers who originally supported the legislation are backing away.Mr. Nelson, the former senator who co-sponsored the law, said he did not fully understand the ramifications. “This was never brought to my attention,” he said in an interview. “Had I known about it, I would have tried to put the kibosh on it.”Representative Peter DeFazio, the Oregon Democrat who is the chairman of the House transportation committee, celebrated the bill’s changes last year, saying it would maintain safety and “will help our manufacturers become much more competitive in the world market and introduce their products more quickly.”Mr. DeFazio, who is currently leading a congressional investigation into the crashes, said in an interview that he was reconsidering the law and might introduce legislation to restore some of the agency’s oversight authority.“If the F.A.A. basically deferred on a safety critical system and did not provide proper oversight, then either the individuals involved are going to be at risk, or the whole system itself isn’t working properly,” he said.Advertisement