https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/26/us/trump-ukraine-whistleblower-guide.html
The Whistle-Blower Complaint and Impeachment Inquiry: What We Know So Far - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
61
AdvertisementSupported byA whistle-blower complaint about President Trump’s call with the leader of Ukraine, in which he asked for help investigating political rivals, has stirred a storm. Here’s how to catch up.By Aisha KhanWashington has been roiled by revelations about President Trump’s contacts with the Ukrainian president. A whistle-blower complaint alleges that Mr. Trump tried to press Ukraine to interfere in the 2020 election by investigating a rival, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. The report prompted House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to announce a formal impeachment inquiry against the president. Here’s a roundup to help you catch up with the news.Secretary of State Mike Pompeo threw up a potential roadblock in the impeachment inquiry on Tuesday when he told lawmakers in a letter that a demand from three House committees for American diplomats to sit for depositions this week amounted to “an act of intimidation” and did not allow enough time for the State Department to properly respond.President Trump on Tuesday kept his focus on an anonymous whistle-blower, asking why he was not “entitled to interview” the person, a day after he said the White House was trying to find out the person’s identity, despite institutional directives and confidentiality protections.Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr. Trump’s private lawyer, was subpoenaed on Monday by House Democrats to furnish records for their impeachment inquiry.Speaker Nancy Pelosi made a private appeal on Sunday to Democrats not to squander their chance to build public support for a full-scale impeachment inquiry into President Trump, pressing lawmakers to maintain a simple and somber message as she declared “we are ready” to push forward with a politically divisive process.Mr. Trump had a phone conversation with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in July in which he pressed him to investigate leading Democrats as “a favor.” The call came as Mr. Trump was withholding nearly $400 million in aid to Ukraine. In the call, he alluded to the aid, but did not explicitly link his request to unfreezing it.After news of the whistle-blower’s complaint emerged, the White House released a reconstructed transcript of the conversation. The revelation prompted House Democrats to open a formal impeachment inquiry into Mr. Trump. Most Democrats, including presidential contenders, support the inquiry.Republicans have largely stood behind the president, saying the conversation did not amount to a quid pro quo. The right-wing media is defending Mr. Trump, saying he is a victim of disinformation.We know the whistle-blower’s complaint was forwarded to the Justice Department, which declined to investigate and released a memo detailing its decision. Here are some takeaways from the call record and the Justice Department memo. Mr. Trump has accused Mr. Biden, without any evidence, of corruption involving his son Hunter Biden’s work for a Ukraine energy company. We examined the allegations.Trump is accused of pressing Ukraine to investigate his political rivals.Here’s an explanation of the impeachment process.Our reporters answered readers’ questions about the unfolding drama.Mr. Biden and his team are working hard to control the narrative on the news. Mr. Trump has had a special obsession with Ukraine; he believes it had a role in the origins of the special counsel’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. And read more about the Ukrainian leader, Volodymyr Zelensky.What does this mean for the 2020 race? Voters appear divided on party lines, while candidates fear that a long impeachment saga will suck the oxygen out of their campaigns. But the fight has been used as a fund-raising opportunity for both Democrats and Republicans.The Times has asked all House members whether they are for or against an impeachment investigation. Here are the results.Advertisement