https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/28/us/politics/how-a-shadow-foreign-policy-in-ukraine-prompted-impeachment-inquiry.html
How a Shadow Foreign Policy in Ukraine Prompted an Impeachment Inquiry - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
48
AdvertisementSupported byBy Kenneth P. Vogel, Andrew E. Kramer and David E. SangerWASHINGTON — Petro O. Poroshenko was still the president of Ukraine earlier this year when his team sought a lifeline. With the polls showing him in clear danger of losing his re-election campaign, some of his associates, eager to hold on to their own jobs and influence, took steps that could have yielded a signal of public support from a vital ally: President Trump.Over several weeks in March, the office of Ukraine’s top prosecutor moved ahead on two investigations of intense interest to Mr. Trump. One was focused on an oligarch — previously cleared of wrongdoing by the same prosecutor — whose company employed former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s son. The other dealt with the release by a separate Ukrainian law enforcement agency to the media of information that hurt Mr. Trump’s 2016 campaign.The actions by the prosecutor, Yuriy Lutsenko, did not come out of thin air. They were the first visible results of a remarkable behind-the-scenes campaign to gather and disseminate political dirt from a foreign country, encouraged by Mr. Trump and carried out by his personal lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani. In the last week their engagement with Ukraine has prompted a formal impeachment inquiry into whether the president courted foreign interference to hurt a leading political rival.The story of how Mr. Trump and Mr. Giuliani operated in Ukraine has emerged gradually in recent months. It was laid out in further detail in the past week in a reconstructed transcript of Mr. Trump’s phone call this summer with a new Ukrainian president and in a complaint filed by a whistle-blower inside the United States government.Along with documents and interviews with a wide variety of people in Ukraine and the United States, the latest revelations show that Mr. Trump and Mr. Giuliani ran what amounted to a shadow foreign policy in Ukraine that unfolded against the backdrop of three elections — this year’s vote in Ukraine and the 2016 and 2020 presidential races in the United States.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: Before the career diplomats who deal with Ukraine discovered a shadowy power structure around President Trump that was determined to undermine and derail them, a little-known Trump cabinet secretary said that the same thing happened to him. A conversation with former Secretary of Veterans Affairs David Shulkin.It’s Thursday, October 24.Do you go by Secretary —Secretary.— or Doctor?Secretary.Secretary?Yeah.O.K. So I want to start with the email that you sent me, because I think it was interesting. You describe yourself as somebody who was fired essentially by a tweet from the president, and that that came after an ordeal that you went through that involved political appointees essentially undermining you. And you call the experience strangely, unusually relevant these days, with the issue of interference by outside political influences, and you specifically mentioned what happened to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine. And you said we should perhaps talk about it on “The Daily.” So here you are.Well, at the time, of course, this all seemed very unique to me. But as I’ve now been out of the Trump administration for almost 18 months, I have noticed a similarity in the behaviors and the patterns.There’s a lot of talk about how the State Department seems to be sidelined in this administration —— the senior State Department official in charge of Ukraine policy, George Kent, told House Committee lawmakers Tuesday he was sidelined from his job —— that William Taylor told congressional investigators there were, quote, “two channels” for policymaking on Ukraine, quote, “one regular and one highly irregular.”Certainly here investigators want to know more about how Yovanovitch ultimately became benched in this entire thing, how she became sidelined.So I want to get to that and why you think what happened to you is similar, but I want to start with your story — your experience with the Trump administration. How is it that you came to be considered for a cabinet position by President Trump?Well, I was in the Obama administration. I was a presidential appointee. I was the undersecretary of health for the Department of Veterans Affairs. I had come from the private sector, where I’d been running hospitals, and if I was given the opportunity to help, I didn’t feel like I could say no. So I spent 18 months in the Obama administration, and I was watching very closely about who the Trump administration would choose for its leadership positions in the V.A. But as a political appointee of the Obama administration, I was preparing to leave like everyone else. I had prepared my resignation letter for January 20th, and every day I would hear that there was a new person being speculated on as the secretary of V.A. And as time went on, we found ourselves into January, just a few weeks right before the inauguration, without any idea of who that secretary would be.We begin with a Fox News alert. We’re awaiting the start of that news conference with President-elect Donald Trump. His first —I happen to have heard that the president-elect on January 11th was going to be giving a press conference. Then as I was watching the teaser on one of the cable networks, the reporter at the very end said the President-elect may be announcing the new Secretary of V.A.Thank you very much. It’s very —And I thought, if I had time, because I had a very busy day, I’d like to watch that —See who he chooses?Yeah.— for the veterans. And by the way, speaking of veterans, I appointed today the head secretary of the Veterans Administration, David Shulkin. And we’ll do a news release in a little while. I’ll tell you about David. He’s fantastic.And I watched the press briefing to find out that he announced me as secretary.So you learn that you will be secretary of the V.A. by watching the news, and the breaking news on television is literally breaking news to you?Yes.O.K., so you start this job already with a feeling that this is going to be unorthodox. So I’m curious, how does this experience begin, and when do you start to detect what you described at the beginning of our conversation and that email that you sent us as something resembling interference?Well, I started to understand that I should stop thinking about this new administration the way that the Obama administration ran. The way the White House worked, from my perspective when I was in the Obama administration, it was a very tightly run ship. In the new administration, there was not a tight approach to how you navigated through the White House and had access to the president. It was pretty loose. So I’m the only member of the cabinet at this point who had been in their job, essentially, and in the administration prior, so I knew what needed to happen. I had a plan. So this looseness in the White House was something that I actually found very refreshing, and I was able to use, I think, to the advantage of the department and to veterans, in that, while others were just learning about their agencies, I knew what we needed to do. So the first large part of the year after the inauguration was a time of great productivity, but I think there were a couple events that started to make me question and wonder whether there was a dual path of decision-making in the White House.One event happened to be nationally televised.I want to thank you all for being here.We were sitting in the Roosevelt Room with the president next to me, and he turned to me, and he said —We’re having a meeting tonight at what we call, affectionately, the “Southern White House.” Seems to be the most convenient location. Everybody always wants to go to the Southern White House.— so, will I see you in Florida this weekend at the meeting on veterans policy and veterans issues?So are you going to be at that meeting? You heard about it, right? It’s going to be great. All about the V.A.And that was the first time I’d heard about it.Even though you are the secretary of Veterans Affairs?Yes. And so I looked at him, and I smiled, because I thought it was somewhat humorous, and I just shook my head no. And I remember that time, because my daughter, Jenny, sent me a email saying that I was now a meme. And I didn’t know what a meme was, so I had to Google being a meme. And I quickly learned what a meme was, and saw that there was this meme of me shaking my head no. I had no idea what he was talking about.So the meme was of a cabinet secretary being out of the loop?Yes, yes. But there clearly were these two paths of information about veterans issues — the ones that came directly for me, and the ones that were coming from other people.And what did you learn about who was providing this alternate path of information? Who are these people?I think that there was a group of appointees — political appointees — in the Department of Veterans Affairs that would, on a regular basis, go over to the White House and have meetings on their own. The Department of Veterans Affairs gets about 30 of these political appointees. They are often appointed because of their political allegiance. They come off the campaign, or they’re found to be supportive of the administration, and they get placed in the department in key roles. So we had about 30 of them.O.K., so what do you understand about why there would be a parallel system? Like, what would be necessary about that? Why would anyone construct a second path of information to the president?Well —I mean, they’ve got you.Well, part of this is speculation, since they weren’t willing to surface these issues and policy disagreements with me, but I believe that there were two issues. One was that they didn’t feel that I was moving fast enough and aggressive enough to fix the department. And I think that that is a reasonable point of view. I was balancing what I believed the pace that the organization could handle change and also what veterans wanted. But secondly, there was a basic disagreement over how fast and how far I was willing to take resources from the V.A. and shift them to the private sector.And what did the background figures you’re describing here, what did they want when it comes to privatization?Our biggest disagreement sounds technical, but it turns out to be very important. They’re called access standards, and the access standards are the rules in which veterans can choose to go outside of the V.A. health care system and get their care.To a private doctor that’s not in the V.A.?To a private doctor that’s not in the V.A. And philosophically, I was in agreement that every veteran should have a choice about where they get their care, but I wanted to do this in a way that would not destroy the current V.A. system. Because my belief is that the V.A. is doing things that the private sector is not doing well, and therefore we needed to keep this a strong system and actually enhance its capabilities. But those that argued for open access standards immediately, my concern was we would see such an immediate shift in resources before the V.A. could be fixed that it would ultimately lead to a complete privatization of the department. The way I described it, it was like turning on a faucet.Rather than turning it on full thrust all of a sudden, I wanted to turn it on slowly and give the V.A. system and the private sector time to adapt to this type of philosophical change. So I believe that that was the issue that I fought hardest on and ultimately ended up costing me my job.We’ll be right back.How does this other faction respond to your resistance to the speed and the scale of what they’re pushing for, which is a much broader privatization plan than I think it sounds like you’re comfortable with?Well, the legislative proposal with the approach that I believe is the right one gets presented to the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee, which is a half-Republican, half-Democratic committee. And the vote is taken in the Senate committee — 14 in favor of the approach that I want to take, and one person, one senator, opposing it.Good sign for you.I thought so. But the White House sided strongly with the one senator who wanted the much more aggressive access standards. And ultimately, the bill that got passed was the version that the one senator wanted.I guess I’m trying to understand — when you say the White House supported a different vision in the Veterans’ Affairs Committee, what does that mean, the White House? Aren’t you part at the White House? You’re the secretary of the V.A., so what does that even mean?It was a very confusing situation, because normally, the secretary speaks for the administration, and I was directly speaking to the president and had the president’s support. So this is where I became aware that there was a dual decision-making process even in the White House itself. What clearly was happening behind the scenes was that there was back-channel information being given to the president, ultimately to the point that he must have decided, with that information, that I actually wasn’t following policy that he wanted to happen. But that was a surprise to me.And that back-channel information, as best you can tell, who was it coming from?I have no idea.So it feels like you’re now in this kind of upside-down world, where you are supposed to be the most powerful person in the V.A., you are now fighting your own administration over legislation, and people around you are kind of eager to circumvent you and cut you out of the process. But they are leaving you in place. You are very much the undisputed secretary of the V.A. So how or when does that start to change?I think that this situation, where there was clearly a battle for who was going to be making the policy, got to the point that this group of political appointees felt that they wanted to see somebody else running the department, and out of frustration, I think, started to resort to ways to try to decrease the authority and the effectiveness that I had. And that’s where I believe that they perfected the art of the leak.In Washington, an allegation, even without fact, has a way of taking a life on its own. So there was information leaked about my travel, and there was misinformation that a trip to Europe was a inappropriate trip, where, in fact, what was not reported was that this trip to Europe was the Five Eyes conference, which were the five allies that have met for 45 years, attended by every secretary of the V.A. previously. And the allegation being that my wife was paid for to be able to attend this trip on a shopping vacation or a European vacation. In fact, the United Kingdom, who was the host of this event in London, had officially invited my wife, who is a physician, who attended these meetings and lectures. And a travel arrangement like this was months in the planning, where everything, especially my wife’s travel, was vetted by the V.A. ethics attorneys, by other staff members in the V.A., by the White House, by the State Department. We did not accept any per diems or any other funds associated with this, but there was an allegation that this was done inappropriately, when, in fact, I just relied upon the V.A., who makes my travel arrangements to do this. Now, when a secretary travels, there are two itineraries that are produced. There is a public itinerary about the public appearances, and then there is an itinerary that is prepared for security about every stop and every place that the secretary will be. Those are confidential. Those were leaked to the press, as well.So it sounds like you’re seeing leaks, in this case, of secure documents that only your internal staff would have access to, given to the press to suggest that you are crossing lines — that, for example, you and your family are cashing in on your position as secretary of the V.A., and this is a very intentional sabotaging of your status.Yes, that’s right. And while I’m a scientist, I’m a physician, so I don’t like to jump to conclusions unless I have facts. And so while many people were telling me that I was being sabotaged, that people were working against me, I chose not to make a conclusion until I had facts. And then one day, my deputy secretary brings to me a email that his staff member found left on the copy machine. It is from the senior political appointee to other political appointees that says, here is the plan. We are going to work to replace the secretary.Wow.We are going to replace the deputy secretary, because he’s not politically aligned with us — a lifelong Republican, by the way. We are going to replace the chief of staff, and we’re going to replace the acting undersecretary. And we’re going to put in place people that are politically aligned with us.Who leaves that memo on the copy machine?It was careless.But it was also very explicit and candid.And now, as a scientist, I had my evidence. I actually now could see exactly what was going on.So I just want to be clear. Prior to all this, you very well understand that there are people talking behind your back about policy, going to the president, telling him, this is what should be done, that might differ from you. But now it’s advanced to a different place, where these people aren’t just happy talking around your back, they are trying to stab you in the back. They’re trying to get rid of you.That’s correct.Did it ever occur to you, because you are secretary of the V.A., just to fire a bunch of these people who seem to be very much working to undermine you, because you are their boss?It’s exactly what I did. I tried to remove them.And what happened?They were told by the White House that they would not be removed, and I was told to stand down by the White House, that I could not remove them.Wow.That emboldened them, knowing that they were protected.So tell me the story of how this all kind of came to a head.Well, there had been lots of speculation about whether I would resign, or whether the president would replace me. I was talking to the president on a regular basis, and I was talking very specifically to General Kelly, who was chief of staff. And on the day that I was fired, I had heard a rumor that maybe I would be fired that day, so I called General Kelly and I said, look, here’s what I’m hearing. And he said, I don’t know anything about it. Let me check into it and call you back. And he called me back promptly, as he often did, and he said, David, I checked into it. There’s no truth to it. I spoke to the president. You have his confidence. Keep on doing what you’re doing. And then about noon that day, the president called me, and we had a discussion about what was happening at V.A. And I was able to tell him that we were working very hard and about to deliver three new policy objectives for him, and he was inquisitive about those policy objectives — a normal conversation — and said, keep going on doing what you’re doing, and let’s talk more about it tomorrow. And about five hours later —Breaking news from the White House tonight. President Trump fired his secretary of Veterans Affairs, David Shulkin. President has tweeted, “I am pleased to announce that I intend to nominate highly respected Admiral Ronnie L. Jackson, MD, as the new Secretary of Veterans Affairs,” which means the current Veterans Affairs secretary David Shulkin has now resigned. Why —And that’s really the only and last time that I heard from the president.Was in a tweet?Yes.So in the end, it sounds like you see yourself as a Trump appointee, very committed to the mission of your department, who was systematically undermined by political appointees who were really determined to push through their agenda and what they saw as the president’s agenda kind of at all costs. And that you became an obstacle. And that does sound kind of familiar in this moment. What do you see as the parallels to what has just happened when it comes to Ukraine? I assume you have been following it just as closely as we have.Well, I think being a public servant focused on the mission of improving services to Americans, and then feeling that misinformation is being presented to the president by people who have other agendas that shortens your ability to serve, I think, is something that doesn’t work for the overall benefit of government. The parallels that I see are that there are outside people who ultimately end up having a big impact on the way the government runs, and I do think that what we’re seeing with the way that the president tends to get information from select individuals, that that really has a big influence on the way that decisions are being made. And it’s important that a president get the right information so they can make the right decisions. And my concern is that we may put policies in place that have consequences for decades to come.And finally, secretary, why is this story important for you to be telling? Not a lot of former secretaries in this administration — former generals, former national security advisers — talk about these experiences.Yeah, I think it’s a duty to share what one’s learned in government, with the result of trying to make this better. I am not trying to throw mud at anybody or to make criticisms of any particular political party. I am trying to be transparent about what happened in my experience so that we can learn from it and make a government that works better for all of us.I mean, your book is called, “It Shouldn’t Be This Hard to Serve Your Country.”That’s right. I am very concerned about the future of public service, and I’m concerned about the future for our veterans. And to have people who are willing to come from the private sector, like myself, and help in government and serve to be put through this type of situation in this type of environment, I think, is going to end up being a big problem for people wanting to come in the future. And so when I say it shouldn’t be this hard to serve your country, the scenario of being systematically undermined I don’t think is a good thing for us in terms of the way that we should be running this country.I wonder, can you confidently recommend, if someone comes to you, to serve in a position in the cabinet right now?My hope is that people will continue to raise their hand to want to serve, but anybody who were to choose to go into this administration needs to understand that it’s likely not to end well, and that people have to be clear about the principles that they have and their belief system and make sure that they stick to that.Secretary, thank you very much.Thank you.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.I’m gathered here with dozens of my congressional colleagues underground in the basement of the Capitol, because if, behind those doors, they intend to overturn the results of an American presidential election, we want to know what’s going on.In a dramatic act of protest, House Republicans stormed into the secure offices where impeachment investigators have been hearing testimony behind closed doors and temporarily disrupted the proceedings. The Republicans, all allies of President Trump, demanded that the impeachment testimony be held in public. But because none of the Republicans are members of the committees conducting the hearings, they were eventually removed from the secure offices. And —My fellow Americans, I greet you this morning from the White House to announce a major breakthrough toward achieving a better future for Syria and for the Middle East. It’s been a long time.In a surprise move on Wednesday, President Trump said he would end the economic sanctions he imposed against Turkey for its deadly invasion of Syria just a week after creating them, saying that he trusted Turkey to abide by a ceasefire.So the sanctions will be lifted unless something happens that we’re not happy with.But in a sign of bipartisan fury over Trump’s approach, Democratic and Republican senators challenged the president’s special envoy to Syria, James Jeffrey, about the original decision to withdraw U.S. troops from Syria, which allowed Turkey to kill hundreds of Kurds and for ISIS fighters to escape from prisons.And you know, Ambassador Jeffrey, I have the greatest respect for you. But one can try to put lipstick on a pig, but it’s still a pig. One can ultimately call capitulation a victory, but it’s still capitulation. And one can ultimately have a retreat and say it’s strategic, but it’s still a retreat. And that’s, I feel, exactly what’s happened here.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Despite the findings of United States intelligence agencies and the Justice Department that Russia was responsible for interfering in the 2016 election, Mr. Trump was driven to seek proof that the meddling was linked to Ukraine and forces hostile to him, even fixating on a fringe conspiracy theory suggesting that Hillary Clinton’s missing emails might be found there.Backed by Mr. Trump, Mr. Giuliani, who once aspired to be secretary of state, sought to tar Mr. Biden with unsubstantiated accusations of impropriety, while he and associates working with him in Ukraine on the president’s agenda pursued their own personal business interests.With the political landscape scrambled by Mr. Poroshenko’s defeat in April and the arrival of a new cast of Ukrainian officials, the approach pursued by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Trump undercut official United States diplomacy.And the signals sent by Mr. Trump — long skeptical of the strategic value of backing Ukraine against Russia, its menacing neighbor to the east — complicated efforts by the new Ukrainian government to fortify itself against Moscow.The intensifying overlap this summer between Mr. Trump’s political agenda in Ukraine and his official foreign policy apparatus is now at the center of an impeachment inquiry that will examine whether the president of the United States directed or encouraged his subordinates to lean on a vulnerable ally for personal political gain.Among the subjects covered in a subpoena sent Friday by House Democrats to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and demands for depositions from American diplomats was Mr. Trump’s decision to freeze a $391 million military aid package to Ukraine this summer not long before his July 25 call with Ukraine’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, who defeated Mr. Poroshenko this spring.Democrats are also looking into the recall in the spring of the United States ambassador to Kiev, Marie L. Yovanovitch, a career foreign service officer who was seen as insufficiently loyal to Mr. Trump by some of his conservative allies. On Friday evening, the State Department’s special envoy for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, abruptly resigned, not long after receiving a summons from House Democrats to sit for a deposition in the coming week.Mr. Trump has dismissed the impeachment investigation as another “witch hunt.”In an interview on Friday, Mr. Giuliani defended his efforts to push the Ukrainians to investigate Mr. Biden, his son, Hunter Biden, and others. He asserted that he was not doing it to try to influence the 2020 presidential election, though Mr. Biden is a leading contender for the Democratic nomination to challenge Mr. Trump.“I was doing it to dig out information that exculpates my client, which is the role of a defense lawyer,” he said.In the months before the steps taken in March on the politically explosive investigations sought by Mr. Trump, Mr. Giuliani had met at least twice with the man who would become a central figure in his efforts and a target of criticism in both countries: Mr. Lutsenko, 54, Ukraine’s top prosecutor.First at a meeting in New York and later in Warsaw, Mr. Giuliani pushed Mr. Lutsenko for information about — and investigations into — a pair of cases of keen interest to his client.They included the Bidens’ activities in Ukraine and the release during the 2016 campaign of incriminating records about Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman. Mr. Giuliani said early this year he had become increasingly convinced that the Manafort records were doctored and disseminated by critics of Mr. Trump to sabotage his campaign, and later used to spur the special counsel’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election.No evidence supports this idea and Mr. Manafort’s own retroactive filings under the Foreign Agents Registration Act corroborated the Ukrainian documents, which also matched financial records in the United States.Still, it was not long before Mr. Trump, sensitive to any questions about the legitimacy of his 2016 victory, began echoing Mr. Giuliani’s language about what they viewed as the Ukrainian origins of the Russia investigation.But Mr. Trump and Mr. Giuliani had also taken a growing interest in the role played by Mr. Biden, as vice president, in the dismissal of a previous Ukrainian prosecutor who had oversight of investigations into an oligarch who had served in a previous Ukrainian government and whose company had employed Hunter Biden. No evidence has surfaced that the former vice president intentionally tried to help his son by pressing for the dismissal of that prosecutor, whose ouster was being sought by other Western governments and institutions concerned about corruption in the Ukrainian government.In their first meeting, in January, Mr. Lutsenko later told people, Mr. Giuliani called Mr. Trump and excitedly briefed him on the discussions. And once Mr. Lutsenko’s office took procedural steps to advance investigations involving the Manafort records and the oligarch linked to Hunter Biden, Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Trump and their allies aggressively promoted stories about the developments to conservative journalists at home, further turning a foreign government’s action to the president’s advantage.“As Russia Collusion fades, Ukrainian plot to help Clinton emerges,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter in March, echoing the headline of one of the first such pieces by a Trump-friendly journalist.Mr. Giuliani had seemed to slide eagerly into his new role. After his hopes of becoming secretary of state were dashed — in part, former administration officials said, because of his extensive foreign business ties — he became a personal lawyer for Mr. Trump when the president came under scrutiny by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.Mr. Trump was publicly lobbying his own Justice Department for an investigation of Mrs. Clinton and other Democrats. When he got no satisfaction on that score, Mr. Giuliani volunteered to take on the role of independent investigator, empowered by nothing other than Mr. Trump’s blessing.Mr. Giuliani rejected the suggestion that he was interfering in the execution of American foreign policy, noting that Mr. Volker and the State Department eventually helped connect him with a top aide to Mr. Zelensky.“If they were concerned, I don’t think they would ask me to handle a mission like this that’s sensitive,” he said. “I feel perfectly comfortable with what we did in Ukraine.”Ukraine was familiar ground to Mr. Giuliani, a former New York City mayor and presidential candidate who had built a thriving consulting and security business.Mr. Giuliani’s activity on behalf of Mr. Trump allowed him to maintain, and increase, his marketability to prospective clients around the world. Hiring him came to be seen as a way to curry favor with the Trump administration.That perception has been fed in Ukraine by the dual roles played by some of his business associates. Chief among them is a Ukrainian-American businessman named Lev Parnas. Mr. Parnas gathered information on the ground in Kiev about the Bidens and the Manafort documents, and he helped connect Mr. Giuliani with Mr. Lutsenko and other Ukrainians with information about the cases that interested Mr. Trump.But Mr. Parnas also has advised Mr. Giuliani on energy deals in the region, and pursued energy deals of his own in Ukraine, while presenting himself as a representative of Mr. Giuliani on the Trump-related matters.In the early spring, as he was helping Mr. Giuliani in Ukraine, Mr. Parnas pitched a deal to the chief executive officer of the Ukrainian government-owned gas company, Naftogaz. Mr. Parnas also advised Mr. Giuliani on an effort related to a methane project in Uzbekistan for which Mr. Giuliani and his associates were to be paid at least $100,000.Mr. Giuliani said the project in Uzbekistan did not pan out.Mr. Parnas, a donor to Mr. Trump, rejected the suggestion that his efforts to assist Mr. Giuliani in Ukraine were related to his business, explaining in an interview on Saturday that he was funding them himself because “I think it’s outrageous that our president is getting blamed for things that he had nothing to do with.”Mr. Parnas said he has not done business with Mr. Giuliani in years, that his discussions with Naftogaz did not yield a deal, that he had no involvement in the Uzbekistan effort, and in fact urged Mr. Giuliani to avoid doing business there.Mr. Giuliani’s business in Ukraine dates to 2004, when he said he was invited to give a speech there. In 2008, one of his companies consulted for Vitali Klitschko, a former boxing and kickboxing champion who lost a bid that year to become mayor of Kiev, Ukraine’s capital, but was elected mayor in 2014.Mr. Giuliani said he no longer represents Mr. Klitschko, but still advises him informally. He chastised the new president, Mr. Zelensky, this month for moving to limit the authority of Mr. Klitschko, who had endorsed Mr. Poroshenko in this year’s election.“Reducing the power of Mayor Klitschko of Kiev was a very bad sign particularly based on the advice of an aide to the President of Ukraine who has the reputation of being a fixer,” Mr. Giuliani wrote on Twitter.Some of Mr. Giuliani’s work in Ukraine has found him on opposing sides in internal Ukrainian feuds.In 2017, one of Mr. Giuliani’s companies signed a contract with Pavel Fuks, a wealthy Ukrainian-Russian developer who was among the many Ukrainians seeking access in Mr. Trump’s Washington. The contract was to help Mr. Fuks attract investment from the United States to his hometown, Kharkiv, Ukraine.A guide to the key figures and dates as President Trump and his allies pressured Ukraine to investigate his political opponents.At the time, Mr. Fuks and others, including Sam Kislin, a Ukrainian-American businessman with ties to Mr. Giuliani, had become entangled in a complicated $1.5 billion deal to buy Ukrainian government bonds.Mr. Lutsenko, the prosecutor, blocked the deal and seized the bonds by raising accusations of fraud. Mr. Kislin responded with suggestions that Mr. Lutsenko acted illegally.Ukrainian media reported that the United States revoked Mr. Lutsenko’s visa for a time amid this dispute, though Mr. Lutsenko denied it. By January, he was able to travel to America, where he met with Mr. Giuliani to discuss investigating the Democrats.Mr. Lutsenko’s eagerness to assist Mr. Giuliani was seen in some quarters in Kiev as an effort to win influential support to resolve his visa problem, fend off Mr. Kislin’s claims and secure American protection against potential political targeting in Ukraine.Mr. Giuliani said he was not being paid for his work for Mr. Trump. He said he does not have any active projects at the moment in Ukraine, and that his connection to the president was not helping his business. “I don’t perceive it being down because I represent Trump, nor do I see a tremendous boost because I represent Trump,” he said.When Mr. Lutsenko was pursuing the matters sought by Mr. Giuliani in the spring, people around Mr. Poroshenko thought it might elicit a show of support for him from Mr. Trump, who had boosted the election prospects of other foreign leaders.Or, if Mr. Poroshenko lost, the thinking in Kiev went, Mr. Trump might at least feel compelled to try to protect Mr. Lutsenko, the helpful prosecutor, from the fate that often befalls aides to defeated Ukrainian leaders: prosecution by the victors and possible jail sentences or exile. As the whistle-blower complaint pointedly noted, Mr. Zelensky had signaled during the campaign that he would replace Mr. Lutsenko if he won the election.At first the strategy encouraged by Mr. Giuliani and pursued by Mr. Lutsenko seemed to be living up to those hopes.Mr. Poroshenko’s allies were pleased when Mr. Trump’s associates, including the president’s son, Donald Trump Jr., and Mr. Giuliani, launched public attacks against one of Mr. Poroshenko’s perceived enemies, Ms. Yovanovitch, the United States ambassador to Ukraine.That month, she had criticized Ukraine’s record on corruption, alluding to reports of vote-buying by Mr. Poroshenko and a rival candidate, and she was seen as an impediment to the investigations sought by Mr. Giuliani. Mr. Poroshenko’s allies told people that they interpreted the Trump allies’ attacks on her as a sign that the Trump team would reciprocate if the investigations into Mr. Trump’s rivals continued.But Mr. Trump never delivered the signal of support Mr. Poroshenko’s team was hoping for, and Mr. Poroshenko lost his re-election campaign in a landslide to Mr. Zelensky, a political neophyte.Mr. Poroshenko’s press service issued a statement Saturday denying he solicited help for his re-election campaign. “Any attempts to link the American scandal to Poroshenko is groundless and unjustified manipulation,” the statement said. “Poroshenko has never negotiated for U.S. support for himself, but for Ukraine.”Mr. Zelensky told reporters on election night that he intended to replace Mr. Lutsenko, who had been accused of turning a blind eye to corruption, though he did not carry out the move until he formed a new government following parliamentary elections in July.When Mr. Trump spoke by phone to the new Ukrainian leader on July 25, Mr. Trump went so far as to complain to Mr. Zelensky about the impending replacement of Mr. Lutsenko. “I heard you had a prosecutor who was very good and he was shut down and that’s really unfair,” Mr. Trump said during the call. “A lot of people are talking about that, the way they shut your very good prosecutor down.”From the early days of Mr. Trump’s campaign, he questioned American policy toward Ukraine, a former Soviet state that had received substantial support from the United States and the European Union. In the wake of Russia’s annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014, Mr. Trump asked why the United States was so committed to the principle that seizures of territory must be opposed.Mr. Trump called the Obama administration’s move to sanction Russia over the annexation “very confrontational,” and said in an interview with The Times in March 2016 that “it didn’t seem to me like anyone else cared other than us,” invoking his longstanding criticism that American allies do not pay their share when it comes to protecting democracy around the world.Mr. Trump would soon develop another issue with Ukraine: Mr. Manafort’s case, which he came to view as evidence that forces in Ukraine aligned with Democrats were out to get him.When Mr. Zelensky, running on fighting corruption and Russia, won a lopsided victory in the presidential election on April 21, it only appears to have intensified Mr. Trump’s determination to find political advantage for himself in the country.Within a few weeks of Mr. Zelensky’s victory, the American ambassador, Ms. Yovanovitch, was recalled, months ahead of schedule, amid the claims by Mr. Trump’s allies that she was undermining him.Mr. Trump quizzed his aides on Mr. Zelensky, asking whether Mr. Zelensky would help him or hurt him.“There was a friend-or-foe operation on,” said one senior United States intelligence official. “No one understood Zelensky.”By May, according to the whistle-blower’s account, the Ukrainian leadership had been led to believe that a meeting or phone call between the two presidents would depend on “whether Zelensky showed willingness to ‘play ball’” on the political investigations.The complaint does not identify who delivered this message to the Ukrainians. But the timing coincided with a visit to Kiev of an American delegation, led by the energy secretary, Rick Perry, for Mr. Zelensky’s inauguration. Mr. Trump had ordered Vice President Mike Pence to skip the inauguration, the whistle-blower complaint said.When members of the delegation returned to Washington, they stressed to Mr. Trump the importance of supporting the new Ukrainian government early on, and urged the president to demonstrate his commitment by granting Mr. Zelensky the White House visit he craved.Mr. Trump was not convinced, saying he thought all Ukrainian politicians were corrupt and, alluding to Mr. Manafort’s case, that the country had tried to take him down.In the meantime, as the whistle-blower complaint notes, Mr. Lutsenko was seeking to remain in office under Mr. Zelensky, and was sending mixed signals about pursuing the case related to the oligarch on whose company board Hunter Biden sat.But Mr. Zelensky would later decide to replace Mr. Lutsenko, cutting off Mr. Giuliani’s main point of access to the Ukrainian government.It was against that backdrop that Mr. Zelensky dispatched one of his closest aides, Andriy Yermak, to open a line of communication with Mr. Giuliani.During a trip to Washington in July, Mr. Yermak, over breakfast at the Trump International Hotel, asked Mr. Volker for a connection to Mr. Giuliani. Mr. Volker broached the idea to Mr. Giuliani over a separate breakfast days later, and Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Yermak were soon chatting by phone.Yet, even as these discussions were ongoing, Mr. Trump personally ordered his staff to freeze more than $391 million in military assistance for Ukraine. The move, made with little explanation, puzzled and frustrated officials in the departments of defense and state, as well as members of Congress from both parties who viewed the assistance as critical to helping a close ally as it confronted Russia.Days later, Mr. Trump and Mr. Zelensky had their fateful phone call. After reminding Mr. Zelensky of the assistance the United States has provided to Ukraine, Mr. Trump asked him to work with Attorney General William P. Barr on investigations into the Bidens and other matters, according to the reconstructed transcript. Among them was the unfounded conspiracy theory suggesting that Ukraine rather than Russia was behind the hack of the Democratic National Committee emails in 2016 and that Mrs. Clinton’s missing emails might be on a server in Ukraine.He also repeatedly asked Mr. Zelensky to work with Mr. Giuliani.Mr. Zelensky assured Mr. Trump that “one of my assistants spoke with Mr. Giuliani just recently and we are hoping very much that Mr. Giuliani will be able to travel to Ukraine and we will meet once he comes to Ukraine.”The day after the call, Mr. Volker and the United States ambassador to the European Union, Gordon D. Sondland, were in Kiev meeting with Mr. Zelensky. A week later, Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Yermak met face to face in Madrid.Mr. Trump then raised eyebrows in August when he called for ending President Vladimir V. Putin’s pariah status on the global stage by readmitting Russia to the Group of 7 industrialized nations. Mr. Trump has quietly been urging a deal to reduce tensions between Ukraine and Russia that would pave the way for a removal of Western sanctions on Moscow, long a goal of Mr. Putin’s.Mr. Trump himself hinted that was his goal when asked about Mr. Zelensky two weeks after the July 25 call. “I think he’s going to make a deal with President Putin, and he will be invited to the White House,” Mr. Trump told reporters.In response to an approaching hurricane, Mr. Trump canceled a Sept. 1 trip to Warsaw at which he would have met Mr. Zelensky in person for the first time, instead sending Mr. Pence, who told reporters that he and Mr. Trump “have great concerns about issues of corruption,” linking them to the delayed military assistance.Only after a bipartisan outcry did the White House release the assistance this month.After hearing on Friday that Mr. Pompeo’s records had been subpoenaed in the impeachment investigation, some State Department officials said they hoped to learn why a career foreign service officer was recalled as ambassador, and whether Mr. Pompeo was complicit in — or had opposed — putting Mr. Giuliani in touch with Ukrainian officials.Mr. Zelensky is still waiting for his White House meeting, as he noted when he finally met with Mr. Trump on Wednesday in New York.“I want to thank you for the invitation to Washington,” Mr. Zelensky said at a joint news conference, “but I think you forgot to tell me the date.”Advertisement